Relational Deep Reinforcement Learning
Vinicius Zambaldi∗, David Raposo∗, Adam Santoro∗, Victor Bapst, Yujia Li, Igor Babuschkin,
Karl Tuyls, David Reichert, Timothy Lillicrap, Edward Lockhart, Murray Shanahan,
Victoria Langston, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, Peter Battaglia
Contact: vzambaldi@google.com, draposo@google.com, adamsantoro@google.com

arXiv:1806.01830v2 [cs.LG] 28 Jun 2018

DeepMind
London, United Kingdom

Abstract
We introduce an approach for deep reinforcement learning (RL) that improves upon the
efficiency, generalization capacity, and interpretability of conventional approaches through
structured perception and relational reasoning. It uses self-attention to iteratively reason about
the relations between entities in a scene and to guide a model-free policy. Our results show that
in a novel navigation and planning task called Box-World, our agent finds interpretable solutions
that improve upon baselines in terms of sample complexity, ability to generalize to more complex
scenes than experienced during training, and overall performance. In the StarCraft II Learning
Environment, our agent achieves state-of-the-art performance on six mini-games – surpassing
human grandmaster performance on four. By considering architectural inductive biases, our
work opens new directions for overcoming important, but stubborn, challenges in deep RL.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) [1, 2, 3] are in part driven by a capacity
to learn good internal representations to inform an agent’s policy. Unfortunately, deep RL models
still face important limitations, namely, low sample efficiency and a propensity not to generalize to
seemingly minor changes in the task [4, 5, 6, 7]. These limitations suggest that large capacity deep
RL models tend to overfit to the abundant data on which they are trained, and hence fail to learn an
abstract, interpretable, and generalizable understanding of the problem they are trying to solve.
Here we improve on deep RL architectures by leveraging insights introduced in the RL literature
over 20 years ago under the Relational RL umbrella (RRL, [8, 9]). RRL advocated the use of relational
state (and action) space and policy representations, blending the generalization power of relational
learning (or inductive logic programming) with reinforcement learning. We propose an approach
that exploits these advantages concurrently with the learning power afforded by deep learning. Our
approach advocates learned and reusable entity- and relation-centric functions [10, 11, 12] to implicitly
reason [13] over relational representations.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) we create and analyze an RL task called Box-World that
explicitly targets relational reasoning, and demonstrate that agents with a capacity to produce
relational representations using a non-local computation based on attention [14] exhibit interesting
generalization behaviors compared to those that do not, and (2) we apply the agent to a difficult
problem – the StarCraft II mini-games [15] – and achieve state-of-the-art performance on six minigames.
∗ Equal contribution.

1

Figure 1: Box-World and StarCraft II tasks demand reasoning about entities and their relations.

2

Relational reinforcement learning

The core idea behind RRL is to combine reinforcement learning with relational learning or Inductive
Logic Programming [16] by representing states, actions and policies using a first order (or relational)
language [8, 9, 17, 18]. Moving from a propositional to a relational representation facilitates generalization over goals, states, and actions, exploiting knowledge learnt during an earlier learning phase.
Additionally, a relational language also facilitates the use of background knowledge. Background
knowledge can be provided by logical facts and rules relevant to the learning problem.
For example in a blocks world, one could use the predicate above(S, A, B) to indicate that block
A is above block B in state S when specifying background knowledge. Such predicates can then be
used during learning for blocks C and D, for example. The representational language, background,
and assumptions form the inductive bias, which guides (and restricts) the search for good policies.
The language (or declarative) bias determines the way concepts can be represented.
Neural nets have traditionally been associated with the attribute-value, or propositional, RL
approaches [19]. Here we translate ideas from RRL into architecturally specified inductive biases
within a deep RL agent, using neural network models that operate on structured representations of a
scene – sets of entities – and perform relational reasoning via iterated, message-passing-like modes of
processing. The entities correspond to local regions of an image, and the agent learns to attend to
key objects and compute their pairwise and higher-order interactions.

3

Architecture

We equip a deep RL agent with architectural inductive biases that may be better suited for learning
(and computing) relations, rather than specifying them as background knowledge as in RRL. This
approach builds off previous work suggesting that relational computations needn’t necessarily be
biased by entities’ spatial proximity [20, 10, 21, 11, 13, 22], and may also profit from iterative
structured reasoning [23, 24, 25, 26].
Our contribution is founded on two guiding principles: non-local computations using a shared
function and iterative computation. We show that an agent which computes pairwise interactions
between entities, independent of their spatial proximity, using a shared function, will be better
suited for learning important relations than an agent that only computes local interactions, such as
in translation invariant convolutions1 . Moreover, an iterative computation may be better able to
capture higher-order interactions between entities.
Computing non-local interactions using a shared function
Among a family of related approaches for computing non-local interactions [20], we chose a computationally efficient attention mechanism. This mechanism has parallels with graph neural networks
and, more generally, message passing computations [27, 28, 29, 12, 30]. In these models entity-entity
1 Intuitively, a ball can be related to a square by virtue of it being “left of”, and this relation may hold whether the
two objects are separated by a centimetre or a kilometer.

2

ReLU

x4

FC 256

Multi-head dot product attention

Feature-wise
max pooling

query

Relational
module

key
value

...

...

ReLU

Conv. 2 x 2, stride 1

...

x2

Input

Figure 2: Box-World agent architecture and multi-head dot-product attention. E is a matrix that
compiles the entities produced by the visual front-end; fθ is a multilayer perceptron applied in parallel
e
to each row of the output of an MHDPA step, A, and producing updated entities, E.
relations are explicitly computed when considering the messages passed between connected nodes of
the graph.
We start by assuming that we already have a set of entities for which interactions must be
computed. We consider multi-head dot-product attention (MHDPA), or self-attention [14], as the
operation that computes interactions between these entities.
For N entities (e1:N ), MHDPA projects each entity i’s state vector, ei , into query, key, and value
vector representations: qi , ki , vi , respectively, whose activities are subsequently normalized to have
0 mean and unit variance using the method from [31]. Each qi is compared to all entities’ keys
k1:N via a dot-product, to compute unnormalized saliencies, si . These are normalized into weights,
wi = softmax (si ). For each entity, the
P cumulative interactions are computed by the weighted mixture
of all entities’ value vectors, ai = j=1:N wi,j vj . This can be compactly computed using matrix
multiplications:


QK T
√
A = softmax
V
(1)
d
|
{z
}
attention weights

where A, Q, K, and V compile the cumulative interactions, queries, keys, and values into matrices,
and d is the dimensionality of the key vectors used as a scaling factor. Like [14], we use multiple,
independent attention “heads”, applied in parallel, which our attention visualisation analyses (see
Results 4.1) suggest may assume different relational semantics through training. The aih vectors,
where h indexes the head, are concatenated together, passed to a multilayer perceptron (2-layer
MLP with ReLU non-linearities) with the same layers sizes as ei , summed with ei (i.e., a residual
connection), and transformed via layer normalization [31], to produce an output. Figure 2 depicts
this mechanism.
We refer to one application of this process as an “attention block”. A single block performs
non-local pairwise relational computations, analogous to relation networks [13] and non-local neural
networks [20]. Multiple blocks with shared (recurrent) or unshared (deep) parameters can be
composed to more easily approximate higher order relations, analogous to message-passing on graphs.
Extracting entities
When dealing with unstructured inputs – e.g., RGB pixels – we need a mechanism to represent the
relevant entities. We decide to make a minimal assumption that entities are things located in a
3

particular point in space. We use a convolutional neural network (CNN) to parse pixel inputs into k
feature maps of size n×n, where k is the number of output channels of the CNN. We then concatenate
x and y coordinates to each k-dimensional pixel feature-vector to indicate the pixel’s position in the
map. We treat the resulting n2 pixel-feature vectors as the set of entities by compiling them into a
n2 × k matrix E. As in [13], this provides an efficient and flexible way to learn representations of the
relevant entities, while being agnostic to what may constitute an entity for the particular problem at
hand.
Agent architecture for Box-World
We adopted an actor-critic set-up, using a distributed agent based on an Importance Weighted
Actor-Learner Architecture [32]. The agent consists of 100 actors, which generate trajectories of
experience, and a single learner, which directly learns a policy π and a baseline function V , using the
actors’ experiences. The model updates were performed on GPU using mini-batches of 32 trajectories
provided by the actors via a queue.
The complete network architecture is as follows. The input observation is first processed through
two convolutional layers with 12 and 24 kernels, 2 × 2 kernel sizes and a stride of 1, followed by
a rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function. The output is tagged with two extra channels
indicating the spatial position (x and y) of each cell in the feature map using evenly spaced values
between −1 and 1. This is then passed to the relational module (described above) consisting of
a variable number of stacked MHDPA blocks, using shared weights. The output of the relational
module is aggregated using feature-wise max-pooling across space (i.e., pooling a n × n × k tensor to
a k-dimensional vector), and finally passed to a small MLP to produce policy logits (normalized and
used as multinomial distribution from which the action was sampled) and a baseline scalar V .
Our baseline control agent replaces the MHDPA blocks with a variable number of residual
convolution blocks. Please see the Appendix for further details, including hyperparameter choices.
Agent architecture for StarCraft II
The same set-up was used for the StarCraft II agent, with a few differences in the network architecture
to accommodate the specific requirements of the StarCraft II Learning Environment (SC2LE, [15]). In
particular, we increased its capacity using 2 residual blocks, each consisting of 3 convolutional layers
with 3 × 3 kernels, 32 channels and stride 1. We added a 2D-ConvLSTM immediately downstream of
the residual blocks, to give the agent the ability to deal with recent history. We noticed that this
was critical for StarCraft because the consequences of an agent’s actions are not necessarily part of
its future observations. For example, suppose the agent chooses to move a marine along a certain
path at timestep t. At t + τ the agent’s observation may depict the marine in a different location,
but the details of the path are not depicted. In these situations, the agent is prone to re-select the
path it had already chosen, rather than, say, move on to choose another action.
For the output, alongside action a and value V , the network produces two sets of action-related
arguments: non-spatial arguments (Args) and spatial arguments (Args x,y ). These arguments are used
as modifiers of particular actions (see [15]). Args are produced from the output of the aggregation
function, whereas Args x,y result from upsampling the output of the relational module.
As in Box-World, our baseline control agent replaces the MHDPA blocks with a variable number
of residual convolution blocks. Please see the Appendix for further details.

4

1.0

Underlying graph
Fraction solved

Branch length = 1

Observation

0.8
0.6
0.4

Relational (1 block)
Relational (2 blocks)
Baseline (3 blocks)
Baseline (6 blocks)

0.2
0.0

0

2

4
6
8
10
Environment steps

Fraction solved

Branch length = 3

1.0

12

14
1e8

7

8
1e8

Relational (2 block)
Relational (4 blocks)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0

1

2

3
4
5
6
Environment steps

Figure 3: Box-World task: example observations (left), underlying graph structure that determines
the proper path to the goal and any distractor branches (middle) and training curves (right).

4

Experiments and results

4.1

Box-World

Task description
Box-World2 is a perceptually simple but combinatorially complex environment that requires abstract
relational reasoning and planning. It consists of a 12 × 12 pixel room with keys and boxes randomly
scattered. The room also contains an agent, represented by a single dark gray pixel, which can move
in four directions: up, down, left, right (see Figure 1).
Keys are represented by a single colored pixel. The agent can pick up a loose key (i.e., one not
adjacent to any other colored pixel) by walking over it. Boxes are represented by two adjacent colored
pixels – the pixel on the right represents the box’s lock and its color indicates which key can be used
to open that lock; the pixel on the left indicates the content of the box which is inaccessible while
the box is locked.
To collect the content of a box the agent must first collect the key that opens the box (the one
that matches the lock’s color) and walk over the lock, which makes the lock disappear. At this point
the content of the box becomes accessible and can be picked up by the agent. Most boxes contain
keys that, if made accessible, can be used to open other boxes. One of the boxes contains a gem,
represented by a single white pixel. The goal of the agent is to collect the gem by unlocking the
box that contains it and picking it up by walking over it. Keys that an agent has in possession are
depicted in the input observation as a pixel in the top-left corner.
In each level there is a unique sequence of boxes that need to be opened in order to reach the gem.
Opening one wrong box (a distractor box) leads to a dead-end where the gem cannot be reached
and the level becomes unsolvable. There are three user-controlled parameters that contribute to
the difficulty of the level: (1) the number of boxes in the path to the goal (solution length); (2)
the number of distractor branches; (3) the length of the distractor branches. In general, the task is
computationally difficult for a few reasons. First, a key can only be used once, so the agent must be
able to reason about whether a particular box is along a distractor branch or along the solution path.
Second, keys and boxes appear in random locations in the room, emphasising a capacity to reason
about keys and boxes based on their abstract relations, rather than based on their spatial positions.
2 The Box-World environment will be made publicly available online.

5

Figure 4: Visualization of attention weights. (a) The underlying graph of one example level; (b)
the result of the analysis for that level, using each of the entities along the solution path (1–5) as
the source of attention. Arrows point to the entities that the source is attending to. An arrow’s
transparency is determined by the corresponding attention weight.
Training results
The training set-up consisted of Box-World levels with solution lengths of at least 1 and up to 4.
This ensured that an untrained agent would have a small probability of reaching the goal by chance,
at least on some levels.3 The number of distractor branches was randomly sampled from 0 to 4.
Training was split into two variants of the task: one with distractor branches of length 1; another
one with distractor branches of length 3 (see Figure 3).
Agents augmented with our relational module achieved close to optimal performance in the two
variants of this task, solving more than 98% of the levels. In the task variant with short distractor
branches an agent with a single attention block was able to achieve top performance. In the variant
with long distractor branches a greater number of attention blocks was required, consistent with
the conjecture that more blocks allow higher-order relational computations. In contrast, our control
agents, which can only rely on convolutional and fully-connected layers, performed significantly worse,
solving less than 75% of the levels across the two task variants.
We repeated these experiments, this time with backward branching in the underlying graph used
to generate the level. With backward branching the agent does not need to plan far into the future;
when it is in possession of a key, a successful strategy is always to open the matching lock. In contrast,
with forward branching the agent can use a key on the wrong lock (i.e. on a lock along a distractor
branch). Thus, forward branching demands more complicated forward planning to determine the
correct locks to open, in contrast to backward branching where an agent can adopt a more reactive
policy, always opting to open the lock that matches the key in possession (see Figure 6 in Appendix).
Visualization of attention weights
T

√ ); specifically, those rows
We next looked at specific rows of the matrix produced by softmax( QK
d
mapping onto to relevant objects in the observation space. Figure 4 shows the result of this analysis
when the attending entities (source of the attention) are objects along the solution path. For one of
the attention heads, each key attends mostly to the locks that can be unlocked with that key. In
3 An agent with a random policy solves by chance 2.3% of levels with solution lengths of 1 and 0.0% of levels with
solution lengths of 4.

6

a)

Longer solution path lengths

b)

Withheld key
Not required
during training

Relational

Baseline

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1.0
Fraction solved

Fraction solved

1.0

n. 4 6 8 10
ai
Tr
Test

n. 4 6 8 10
ai
Tr
Test

Relational

Baseline

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

.

in

a
Tr

t

s
Te

.

in

a
Tr

t

s
Te

Figure 5: Generalization in Box-World. Zero-shot transfer to levels that required: (a) opening a
longer sequence of boxes; (b) using a key-lock combination that was never required during training.
other words, the attention weights reflect the options available to the agent once a key is collected.
For another attention head, each key attends mostly to the agent icon. This suggests that it is
relevant to relate each object with the agent, which may, for example, provide a measure of relative
position and thus influence the agent’s navigation.
In the case of RGB pixel inputs, the relationship between keys and locks that can be opened
with that key is confounded with the fact that keys and the corresponding locks have the same RGB
representation. We therefore repeated the analysis, this time using one-hot representation of the
input, where the mapping between keys and the corresponding locks is arbitrary. We found evidence
for the following: (1) keys attend to the locks they can unlock; (2) locks attend to the keys that can
be used to unlock them; (3) all the objects attend to the agent location; (4) agent and gem attend to
each other and themselves.
Generalization capability: testing on withheld environments
As we observed, the attention weights captured a link between a key and its corresponding lock, using
a shared computation across entities. If the function used to compute the weights (and hence, used
to determine that certain keys and locks are related) has learned to represent some general, abstract
notion of what it means to “unlock” – e.g., unlocks(key, lock) – then this function should be
able to generalize to key-lock combinations that it has never observed during training. Similarly, a
capacity to understand “unlocking” shouldn’t necessarily be affected by the number of locks that
need to be unlocked to reach a solution.
And so, we tested the model under two conditions, without further training: (1) on levels that
required opening a longer sequence of boxes than it had ever observed (6, 8 and 10), and (2) on levels
that required using a key-lock combination that was never required for reaching the gem during
training, instead only being placed on distractor paths. In the first condition the agent with the
relational module solved more than 88% of the levels, across all three solution length conditions. In
contrast, the agent trained without the relational module had its performance collapse to 5% when
tested on sequences of 6 boxes and to 0% on sequences of 8 and 10. On levels with new key-lock
combinations, the agent augmented with a relational module solved 97% of the new levels. The
agent without the relational module performed poorly, reaching only 13%. Together, these results
show that the relational module confers on our agents, at least to a certain extent, the ability to
do zero-shot transfer to more complex and previously unseen problems, a skill that so far has been
difficult to attain using neural networks.

7

Mini-game
Agent

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

DeepMind Human Player [15]

26

133

46

41

729

6880

138

StarCraft Grandmaster [15]

28

177

61

215

727

7566

133

Random Policy [15]

1

17

4

1

23

12

<1

FullyConv LSTM [15]

26

104

44

98

96

3351

6

PBT-A3C [33]

–

101

50

132

125

3345

0

Relational agent

27

196 ↑

62 ↑

303 ↑

736 ↑

4906

123

Control agent

27

187 ↑

61

295 ↑

602

5055

120

Table 1: Mean scores achieved in the StarCraft II mini-games using full action set. ↑ denotes a score
that is higher than a StarCraft Grandmaster. Mini-games: (1) Move To Beacon, (2) Collect Mineral
Shards, (3) Find And Defeat Zerglings, (4) Defeat Roaches, (5) Defeat Zerglings And Banelings, (6)
Collect Minerals And Gas, (7) Build Marines.

4.2

StarCraft II mini-games

Task description
StarCraft II is a popular video game that presents a very hard challenge for reinforcement learning.
It is a multi-agent game where each player controls a large number (hundreds) of units that need to
interact and collaborate (see Figure 1). It is partially observable and has a large action space, with
more than 100 possible actions. The consequences of any single action – in particular, early decisions
in the game – are typically only observed many frames later, posing difficulties in temporal credit
assignment and exploration.
We trained our agents on the suite of 7 mini-games developed for the StarCraft II Learning
Environment (SC2LE, [15]). These mini-games were proposed as a set of specific scenarios that are
representative of the mechanics of the full game and can be used to test agents in a simpler set up
with a better defined reward structure, compared to the full game.
Training results
For these results we used the full action set provided by SC2LE and performance was measured as
the mean score over 30 episodes for each mini-game. Our agent implementations achieved high scores
across all the mini-games (Table 1). In particular, the agent augmented with a relational module
achieved state-of-the-art results in six mini-games and its performance surpassed that of the human
grandmaster in four of them.4
Head-to-head comparisons between our two implementations show that the agent with the
relational component (relational) achieves equal or better results than the one without (control)
across all mini-games. We note that both models improved substantially over the previous best [15].
This can be attributed to a number of factors: better RL algorithm [32], better hyperparameter
tuning to address issues of credit assignment and exploration, longer training, improved architecture,
and a different action selection procedure. Next, we focus on differences afforded by relational
inductive biases and turn to particular generalization tests to determine the behavioural traits of the
control and relational agents.
4 For replay videos visit: http://bit.ly/2kQWMzE

8

Generalization capability
As observed in Box-World, a capacity to better understand underlying relational structure – rather
than latch onto superficial statistics – may manifest in better generalization to never-before-seen
situations. To test generalization in SC2 we took agents trained on Collect Mineral Shards, which
involved using two marines to collect randomly scattered minerals and tested them, without further
training, on modified levels that allowed the agents to instead control five marines. Intuitively, if
an agent understands that marines are independent units that can be coordinated, yet controlled
independently to collect resources, then increasing the number of marines available should only
affect the underlying strategy of unit deployment, and should not catastrophically break model
performance.
We observed that – at least for medium size networks – there may be some interesting generalization
capabilities, with the best seed of the relational agent achieving better generalization scores in the
test scenario. However, we noticed high variability in these results, with the effect diminishing when
using larger models (which may be more prone to overfitting on the training set). Therefore, more
work is needed to understand the generalization effects of using a relational agent in StarCraft II
(see Figure 7 in Appendix).
Given the combinatoric richness of the full-game, an agent is frequently exposed to situations on
which it was not trained. Thus, an improved capacity to generalize to new situations caused by a
better understanding of underlying, abstract relations is important.

5

Conclusion

By introducing structured perception and relational reasoning into deep RL architectures, our agents
can learn interpretable representations, and exceed baseline agents in terms of sample complexity,
ability to generalize, and overall performance. This demonstrates key benefits of marrying insights
from RRL with the representational power of deep learning. Instead of trying to directly characterize
the internal representations, we appealed to: (1) a behavioural analysis, and (2) an analysis of the
internal mechanisms of the attention mechanism we used to compute entity-entity interactions. (1)
showed that the learned representations allowed for better generalization, which is characteristic of
relational representations. (2) showed that the model’s internal computations were interpretable, and
congruent with the computations we would expect from a model computing task-relevant relations.
Future work could draw on computer vision for more sophisticated structured perceptual reasoning
mechanisms (e.g., [34]), and hierarchical RL and planning [35, 36] to allow structured representations
and reasoning to translate more fully into structured behaviors. It will also be important to further
explore the semantics of the agent’s learned representations, through the lens of what one might
hard-code in traditional RRL.
More speculatively, this work blurs the line between model-free agents, and those with a capacity
for more abstract planning. An important feature of model-based approaches is making general
knowledge of the environment available for decision-making. Here our inductive biases for entity- and
relation-centric representations and iterated reasoning reflect key knowledge about the structure of
the world. While not a model in the technical sense, it is possible that the agent learns to exploit this
relational architectural prior similarly to how an imagination-based agent’s forward model operates
[37, 38, 39]. More generally, our work opens new directions for RL via a principled hybrid of flexible
statistical learning and more structured approaches.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Richard Evans, Théophane Weber, André Barreto, Daan Wierstra, John
Agapiou, Petko Georgiev, Heinrich Küttler, Andrew Dudzik, Aja Huang, Ivo Danihelka, Timo Ewalds
and many others on the DeepMind team.

9

References
[1] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529, 2015.
[2] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering the
game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
[3] Andrei A. Rusu, Matej Vecerik, Thomas Rothörl, Nicolas Heess, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell.
Sim-to-real robot learning from pixels with progressive nets. In 1st Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
CoRL 2017, Mountain View, California, USA, November 13-15, 2017, Proceedings, pages 262–270, 2017.
[4] Marta Garnelo, Kai Arulkumaran, and Murray Shanahan. Towards deep symbolic reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05518, 2016.
[5] Chiyuan Zhang, Oriol Vinyals, Remi Munos, and Samy Bengio. A study on overfitting in deep
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06893, 2018.
[6] Brenden M Lake, Tomer D Ullman, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Samuel J Gershman. Building machines
that learn and think like people. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40, 2017.
[7] Ken Kansky, Tom Silver, David A Mély, Mohamed Eldawy, Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Xinghua Lou,
Nimrod Dorfman, Szymon Sidor, Scott Phoenix, and Dileep George. Schema networks: Zero-shot
transfer with a generative causal model of intuitive physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.04317, 2017.
[8] Saso Dzeroski, Luc De Raedt, and Hendrik Blockeel. Relational reinforcement learning. In Inductive
Logic Programming, 8th International Workshop, ILP-98, Madison, Wisconsin, USA, July 22-24, 1998,
Proceedings, pages 11–22, 1998.
[9] Saso Dzeroski, Luc De Raedt, and Kurt Driessens. Relational reinforcement learning. Machine Learning,
43(1/2):7–52, 2001.
[10] Peter Battaglia, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew Lai, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, et al. Interaction networks for
learning about objects, relations and physics. In Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 4502–4510, 2016.
[11] David Raposo, Adam Santoro, David Barrett, Razvan Pascanu, Timothy Lillicrap, and Peter
Battaglia. Discovering objects and their relations from entangled scene representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.05068, 2017.
[12] Peter W. Battaglia, Jessica B. Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, Caglar Gulcehre,
Francis Song, Andrew Ballard, Justin Gilmer, George Dahl, Ashish Vaswani, Kelsey Allen, Charles
Nash, Victoria Langston, Chris Dyer, Nicolas Heess, Daan Wierstra, Pushmeet Kohli, Matt Botvinick,
Oriol Vinyals, Yujia Li, and Razvan Pascanu. Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph
networks. arXiv, 2018.
[13] Adam Santoro, David Raposo, David G Barrett, Mateusz Malinowski, Razvan Pascanu, Peter Battaglia,
and Tim Lillicrap. A simple neural network module for relational reasoning. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pages 4974–4983, 2017.
[14] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 6000–6010, 2017.
[15] Oriol Vinyals, Timo Ewalds, Sergey Bartunov, Petko Georgiev, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Michelle
Yeo, Alireza Makhzani, Heinrich Küttler, John Agapiou, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. Starcraft ii: a new
challenge for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04782, 2017.
[16] Stephen Muggleton and Luc De Raedt. Inductive logic programming: Theory and methods. J. Log.
Program., 19/20:629–679, 1994.
[17] Kurt Driessens and Jan Ramon. Relational instance based regression for relational reinforcement learning.
In Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference (ICML 2003), August
21-24, 2003, Washington, DC, USA, pages 123–130, 2003.
[18] Kurt Driessens and Saso Dzeroski. Integrating guidance into relational reinforcement learning. Machine
Learning, 57(3):271–304, 2004.

10

[19] M. van Otterlo. Relational representations in reinforcement learning: Review and open problems, 7
2002.
[20] Xiaolong Wang, Ross Girshick, Abhinav Gupta, and Kaiming He. Non-local neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.07971, 2017.
[21] Nicholas Watters, Andrea Tacchetti, Theophane Weber, Razvan Pascanu, Peter Battaglia, and Daniel
Zoran. Visual interaction networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.01433, 2017.
[22] Han Hu, Jiayuan Gu, Zheng Zhang, Jifeng Dai, and Yichen Wei. Relation networks for object detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.11575, 2017.
[23] Irwan Bello, Hieu Pham, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, and Samy Bengio. Neural combinatorial
optimization with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09940, 2016.
[24] Hanjun Dai, Elias Khalil, Yuyu Zhang, Bistra Dilkina, and Le Song. Learning combinatorial optimization
algorithms over graphs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 6351–6361, 2017.
[25] Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-learner.
In NIPS 2017 Workshop on Meta-Learning, 2017.
[26] WWM Kool and M Welling. Attention solves your tsp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08475, 2018.
[27] Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The
graph neural network model. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 20(1):61–80, 2009.
[28] Mathias Niepert, Mohamed Ahmed, and Konstantin Kutzkov. Learning convolutional neural networks
for graphs. In International conference on machine learning, pages 2014–2023, 2016.
[29] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
[30] Misha Denil, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Serkan Cabi, David Saxton, and Nando de Freitas. Programmable agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06383, 2017.
[31] Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
[32] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymir Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Importance weighted actor-learner architecture:
Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.01561, 2018.
[33] Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali Razavi,
Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, et al. Population based training of neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09846, 2017.
[34] Xinlei Chen, Li-Jia Li, Li Fei-Fei, and Abhinav Gupta. Iterative visual reasoning beyond convolutions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11189, 2018.
[35] Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Simon Osindero, Tom Schaul, Nicolas Heess, Max Jaderberg, David
Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Feudal networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.01161, 2017.
[36] Arthur Guez, Théophane Weber, Ioannis Antonoglou, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Daan Wierstra,
Rémi Munos, and David Silver. Learning to search with mctsnets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04697,
2018.
[37] Jessica B Hamrick, Andrew J Ballard, Razvan Pascanu, Oriol Vinyals, Nicolas Heess, and Peter W
Battaglia. Metacontrol for adaptive imagination-based optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02670,
2017.
[38] Razvan Pascanu, Yujia Li, Oriol Vinyals, Nicolas Heess, Lars Buesing, Sebastien Racanière, David
Reichert, Théophane Weber, Daan Wierstra, and Peter Battaglia. Learning model-based planning from
scratch. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06170, 2017.
[39] Théophane Weber, Sébastien Racanière, David P Reichert, Lars Buesing, Arthur Guez, Danilo Jimenez
Rezende, Adria Puigdomènech Badia, Oriol Vinyals, Nicolas Heess, Yujia Li, et al. Imagination-augmented
agents for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06203, 2017.
[40] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual networks.
In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 630–645. Springer, 2016.

11

Appendix
A

Box-world

Task
Each level in Box-world is procedurally generated. We start by generating a random graph (a tree) that
defines the correct path to the goal – i.e., the sequence of boxes that need to be opened to reach the gem.
This graph also defines multiple distractor branches – boxes that lead to dead-ends. The agent, keys and
boxes, including the one containing the gem, are positioned randomly in the room, assuring that there is
enough space for the agent to navigate between boxes. There is a total of 20 keys and 20 locks that are
randomly sampled to produce the level. An agent receives a reward of +10 for collecting the gem, +1 for
opening a box in the solution path and −1 for opening a distractor box. A level terminates immediately
after the gem is collected or a distractor box is opened.
The generation process produces a very large number of possible trees, making it extremely unlikely that
the agent will face the same level twice. The procedural generation of levels also allows us to create different
training-test splits by withholding levels that conform to a particular case during training and presenting
them to the agent at test time.

Agent architecture
The agent had an entropy cost of 0.005, discount (γ) of 0.99 and unroll length of 40 steps. Queries, keys and
values were produced by 2 to 4 attention heads and had an embedding size (d) of 64. The output of this
module was aggregated using a feature-wise max pooling function and passed to a 4 fully connected layers,
each followed by a ReLU. Policy logits (π, size 4) and baseline function (V , size 1) were produced by a linear
projection. The policy logits were normalized and used as multinomial distribution from which the action (a)
was sampled.
Training was done using RMSprop optimiser with momentum of 0,  of 0.1 and a decay term of 0.99. The
learning rate was tuned, taking values between 1e−5 and 2e−4. Informally, we note that we could replicate
these results using an A3C setup, though training took longer.

Control agent architecture
As a baseline control agent we used the same architecture as the relational agent but replaced the relational
module with a variable number (3 to 6) of residual-convolutional blocks. Each residual block comprised two
convolutional layers, with 3 × 3 kernels, stride of 1 and 26 output channels.

B

StarCraft II mini-games

Starcraft II agents were trained with Adam optimiser for a total of 10 billion steps using batches of 32
trajectories, each unrolled for 80 steps. A linear decay was applied to the optimiser learning rate and entropy

0.8

Relational
Forward branching
Backward branching

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Baseline

1.0
Fraction solved

Fraction solved

1.0

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Environment steps 1e8

Forward branching
Backward branching

0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Environment steps

1.0
1e9

Figure 6: Box-World: forward branching versus backward branching. With backward branching, any
given key can only open one box; however, each key type (i.e. color), can appear in multiple boxes.
This means that an agent can adopt a more reactive policy without planning beyond which box to
open next.

12

200
Relational
Control

Mean score

150

100

50

0

1 marine

2 marines

3 marines

4 marines

5 marines

10 marines

Figure 7: Generalization results on the StarCraft II mini-game Collect Mineral Shards. Agents were
trained on levels with 2 marines and tested on levels with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 10 marines. Colored bars
indicate mean score of the ten best seeds; error bars indicate standard error.

loss scaling throughout training (see Table 2 for details). We ran approximately 100 experiments for each
mini-game, following Table 4 hyperparameter settings and 3 seeds.

Relational Agent architecture
The StarCraft II (SC2) agent architecture follows closely the one we adopted in Box-World. Here we highlight
the changes needed to satisfy SC2 constraints.
Input-preprocessing. At each time step agents are presented with 4 sources of information: minimap,
screen, player, and last-action. These tensors share the same pre-processing: numerical features are rescaled
with a logarithmic transformation and categorical features are embedded into a continuous 10-dimensional
space.
State encoding. Spatially encoded inputs (minimap and screen) are tiled with binary masks denoting
whether the previous action constituted a screen- or minimap-related action. These tensors are then fed to
independent residual convolutional blocks, each consisting of one convolutional layer (4 × 4 kernels and stride
2) followed by a residual block with 2 convolutional layers (3 × 3 kernels and stride 1), which process and
downsample the inputs to [8 × 8 × #channels 1 ] outputs. These tensors are concatenated along the depth
dimension to form a singular spatial input (inputs 3D ). The remaining inputs (player and last-action) are
concatenated and passed to a 2-layer MLP (128 units, ReLU, 64 units) to form a singular non-spatial input
(inputs 2D ).
Memory processing. Next, inputs 2D is passed to the Conv2DLSTM along with its previous state to
produce a new state and outputs 2D , which represents an aggregated history of input observations.
Relational processing. outputs 2D is flattened and passed to the stacked MHDPA blocks (see Table 3
for details). Its output tensors follow two separate pathways – relational-spatial: reshapes the tensors to
their original spatial shape [8 × 8 × #channels 2 ]; relational-nonspatial: aggregates through a feature-wise
max-pooling operation and further processes using a 2-layer MLP (512 units per layer, ReLU activations).
Output processing. inputs 2D and relational-nonspatial are concatenated to form a set of shared features.
Policy logits are produced by feeding shared features to a 2-layer MLP (256 units, ReLU, |actions| units) and
masking unavailable actions (following [15]). Similarly, baselines values V are generated by feeding shared
features to a separate 2-layer MLP (256 units, ReLU, 1 unit).
Actions are sampled using computed policy logits and embedded into a 16 dimensional vector. This
embedding is used to condition shared features and generate logits for non-spatial arguments (Args) through
independent linear combinations (one for each argument). Finally, spatial arguments (Args x,y ) are obtained
by first deconvolving relational-spatial to [32 × 32 × #channels 3 ] tensors using Conv2DTranspose layers,
conditioned by tiling the action embedding along the depth dimension and passed to a 1 × 1 × 1 convolution
layers (one for each spatial argument). Spatial arguments (x, y) are produced by sampling resulting tensors
and selecting the corresponding row and column indexes.

Control agent architecture
The baseline control agent architecture only differs on the relational processing part of the pipeline. Analogous
to the relational agent, outputs2D are obtained from Conv2DLSTM layers. These tensors are first passed

13

Hyperparameter

Value

Conv2DLSTM
Output channels (#channels 1 )
Kernel shape
Stride
Conv2DTranspose
Output channels (#channels 3 )
Kernel shape
Stride
Discount (γ)
Batch size
Unroll Length
Baseline loss scaling
Clip global gradient norm
Adam β1
Adam β2
Adam 

96
(3, 3)
(1, 1)
16
(4, 4)
(2, 2)
0.99
32
80
0.1
100.0
0.9
0.999
1e−8

Table 2: Shared fixed hyperparameters across mini-games.
Setting
MLP layers
Units per MLP layer
MLP activations
Attention embedding size
Weight sharing

Value
2
384
ReLU
32
shared MLP across blocks
shared embedding across blocks

Table 3: Fixed MHDPA settings for StarCraft II mini-games.
to a 12-layer deep residual model – comprising 4 blocks of 3 convolutions layers (32 output channels, 4 × 4
kernel for the first convolution and 3 × 3 for the second and third, and stride 1) interleaved with ReLU
activations and skip-connections – as proposed by [40], to form the relational-spatial outputs. These tensors
also follow a separate pathway where they are flattened and passed to a 2-layer MLP (512 units per layer,
ReLU activations) to produce what we refer to above as relational-nonspatial. The remaining architecture is
identical to the relational agent.

14

Hyperparameter

Value

Relational module
Number of heads
Number of blocks
Entropy loss scaling
Adam learning rate

[1, 3]
[1, 3, 5]
[1e−1, 1e−2, 1e−3]
[1e−4, 1e−5]

Table 4: Swept hyperparameters across mini-games.

15

