1

An Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Framework for Radio Resource Management

arXiv:2501.12991v1 [cs.MA] 22 Jan 2025

Eslam Eldeeb and Hirley Alves

Abstract—Offline multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
addresses key limitations of online MARL, such as safety
concerns, expensive data collection, extended training intervals,
and high signaling overhead caused by online interactions with
the environment. In this work, we propose an offline MARL
algorithm for radio resource management (RRM), focusing on
optimizing scheduling policies for multiple access points (APs)
to jointly maximize the sum and tail rates of user equipment
(UEs). We evaluate three training paradigms: centralized, independent, and centralized training with decentralized execution
(CTDE). Our simulation results demonstrate that the proposed
offline MARL framework outperforms conventional baseline
approaches, achieving over a 15% improvement in a weighted
combination of sum and tail rates. Additionally, the CTDE
framework strikes an effective balance, reducing the computational complexity of centralized methods while addressing the
inefficiencies of independent training. These results underscore
the potential of offline MARL to deliver scalable, robust, and
efficient solutions for resource management in dynamic wireless
networks.
Index Terms—Centralized training decentralized execution,
conservative Q-learning, offline multi-agent reinforcement learning, radio resource management

I. I NTRODUCTION
The road toward future intelligent wireless communication
systems, such as the one envisioned by 6G, is paved with
a growing interest in applying machine learning / artificial
intelligence (ML/AI) to wireless systems [1], [2]. Machine
learning and artificial intelligence (ML/AI) techniques have
been instrumental in advancing beyond 5G systems. They are
poised to play a more critical role in developing 6G networks.
Given the heightened scale, complexity, and distributed nature
of 6G, these technologies are essential for effectively addressing such intricate challenges [3], [4]. These challenges include
(but are not limited to) radio resource management (RRM),
which is often too complex to be modeled using traditional
statistical methods. The RRM problem is generally a nonconvex optimization problem, and its complexity increases
tremendously as the network grows.
In the literature, RRM has been addressed using information theory [5], geometric programming [6], and game
theory [7]. However, these algorithms may fail due to the
dynamic behavior of the wireless systems. In this regard,
online reinforcement learning (RL) has shown a promising
contribution towards solving RRM problems [8]. Online RL
Eslam Eldeeb and Hirley Alves are with the Centre for Wireless Communications (CWC), University of Oulu, Finland. (e-mail: eslam.eldeeb@oulu.fi;
hirley.alves@oulu.fi).
This work was supported by 6G Flagship (Grant Number 369116) funded
by the Research Council of Finland.

involves an agent that interacts with the environment, observes
its condition (state), takes a decision (action) and receives a
feedback signal (reward) indicating the quality of the decision.
Online RL techniques are suitable for RRM as they can solve
the complex RRM problem in a model-free manner, without
deployment knowledge. In addition, it benefits from the control
and feedback methods in the wireless network to iteratively
optimize and update the designed algorithm.
Recent advances in Online RL have witnessed the rise of
two well-established RL frameworks: deep RL and multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL). Deep RL combines robust
deep neural networks (DNNs) with RL [9]. This eases optimizing complex and large-scale environments. On the other hand,
MARL enables joint decision-making optimization (policy
optimization) of multiple agents [10]. MARL algorithms vary
from cooperative MARL [11], where various agents cooperate
towards one goal, and competitive MARL [12], where multiple
agents compete against each other. We focus on cooperative
MARL as we aim to optimize the scheduling policy of several
entities to achieve a joint goal in the system. The cooperative MARL problem itself varies according to the agents’
communication rate [13]. For instance, decentralized solutions
assume no communication between the agents, whereas centralized techniques allow complete communication between
the agents [14]. Recent techniques propose mixed centralized
and decentralized techniques [15].
Online MARL faces significant challenges when deployed
to real-time wireless scenarios. First, it relies on online interaction with the environment to explore and visit the environment states. This online interaction might not be feasible,
safe, timely, or costly. Second, some MARL variants, such
as centralized MARL methods, enable interaction between
the agents, which adds an extra layer of complexity and
overhead to the environment. These problems can addressed by
optimizing the policy offline via a static dataset pre-collected
using a behavioral policy. Thus, undesirable online interactions
are mitigated. This opens the door for offline MARL.
A. Offline MARL
Offline MARL considers an offline static dataset to be used
to optimize the policies of multiple agents [16]. Offline MARL
assumes that the agents can not interact with the environment
during the optimization (training) phase. After training, the
agents deploy the policies they have learned online. The
offline dataset is usually collected using a behavioral policy,
which is a policy designed using known traditional methods
or even randomly. Offline MARL overcomes the safety and

2

cost problems accompanied by online MARL by mitigating
online interaction. Moreover, it limits signaling overhead and
complex communication requirements between the agents by
moving policy optimization offline. In addition, since the
training is performed offline, it can be easily transferred to a
powerful central unit, removing computational burdens from
the limited resources of wireless entities.
Adapting traditional online MARL techniques to an offline
setting introduces a distributional shift between the behavior
and learned policies. This shift motivates overestimation of
the unseen experiences in the dataset, uncertain policies, and
training degradation [17]. Several methods have suggested
constraints on the difference between the behavior and learning
policies, called behavior-constrained methods [18]. Another
family of methods penalizes the value of out-of-distribution
(OOD) actions (unseen actions in the dataset), which are called
conservative methods [19]. Conservative Q-learning (CQL) is
a conservative offline RL technique that uses KL-divergence
as a regularization parameter to penalize the weights of OOD
actions. This work proposes an offline MARL algorithm based
on CQL for the RRM problem.
B. Related Work
Over the past few years, many works in the literature have
contributed to solving the RRM problem, mostly in an online
fashion, for single and multi-agent reinforcement learning.
Among the first to work on this problem is [20], which
proposes a (single-agent) reinforcement learning approach for
self-organizing networks (SONs) in small cells. Then, [21]
proposes a deep RL algorithm for the spectrum sharing and
resource allocation problem in cognitive radio systems. They
adopt a deep RL algorithm for efficient power control so that
the secondary user can share a common spectrum with the
primary user. The authors in [22] propose an efficient resource
and power optimization using reinforcement learning to jointly
minimize the age-of-information (AoI) and transmission power
of IoT sensors in unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) networks.
In contrast, the work in [23] combines generative adversarial
network (GAN) with deep RL for resource management and
network slicing. A recent work in [24] solves the RRM
problem using graph neural networks (GNNs). The authors
formulate the problem as an unsupervised primal-dual problem. They develop a GNN architecture that parameterizes
the RRM policies as a graph topology derived from the
instantaneous channel conditions.
Several works have formulated MARL algorithms for the
RRM problem and wireless communication. For example, the
authors in [25] formulate the MARL problem for resource
management in UAV networks. They present a comprehensive
comparison between different MARL schemes. The authors
in [26] propose an online MARL algorithm for the RRM
problem to maximize both sum and tail rates. In [27], a
dynamic power allocation is performed using MARL, where
local observations are shared between nearby transmitters and
receivers. The authors in [28] propose a distributed MARL
approach for multi-cell wireless-powered communication networks to charge limited power users for efficient data collection wirelessly. In [29], the authors addressed the dynamic

resource management in X-subnetworks, where X refers to any
entity such as a robot, vehicle, or module, and subnetworks
refer to cells that can be part of a larger infrastructure. They
propose combining MARL algorithms and attention-based
layers to solve the resource management problem.
Even though offline RL and offline MARL are promising
techniques, they have only recently begun to capture significant attention from the wireless communications community,
e.g., [30], [31]. In [30], the authors propose an offline and
distributional MARL algorithm for resource management in
UAV networks. The work in [31] proposes a single-agent
offline RL algorithm for the RRM problem. It has proved that
a mixture of datasets of multiple behavioral policies can lead
to an optimal scheduling policy. However, they assume all
access points can be modeled as one agent, thus neglecting
the multi-agent scenario. The work in [32] proposes an offline
and distributional RL algorithm for the RRM problem that
combines deep RL with distributional RL offline to overcome
the uncertainties of the wireless environment. Similarly, they
only focus on the single-agent case.
Most of the literature above suffers from significant drawbacks. First, the majority of these works targeted optimizing a
single objective. However, the RRM problem targets multiple
objectives, e.g., maximizing both sum and tail rates or AoI
and pilot length. Second, some of these works considered the
single-agent scenario and combined all agents in a centralized
fashion. This is a notable concern as the network usually consists of many transmitters and users. Therefore, handling the
RRM problem in a centralized fashion explodes the dimension
and complexity of the RL problem, making it vulnerable to
degrading performance. Finally, most of the existing works in
the literature considered online RL or online MARL, which is
unsafe, impractical, and very complex [33] due to the need for
a massive online interaction with the environment, especially
in the multi-agent case. These challenges heavily affect the
communication network due to the need for continuous communication between the agents, leading to significant signaling
overhead.
C. Main Contributions
This work presents an offline MARL algorithm for RRM.
We assume a general model and pose the RRM problem
as a partially observable Markov decision process (MDP).
Offline MARL proposes multi-agent optimization using only
an offline static dataset without any interaction with the
environment. Hence, it fits the RRM problem where multiple
agents cooperate to serve the users. To illustrate our results,
but without loss of generality, we model our RRM problem
as a joint optimization problem that includes sum and tail
rates. We aim to reach a resource management policy that
maximizes a linear combination of sum and tail rates. The
main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We formulate the RRM problem using a partially observable Markov decision process (MDP). In addition,
we present a preliminary result using online MARL.
• We propose two offline MARL algorithms: soft actorcritic (SAC), and conservative Q-learning (CQL). We

3

TABLE I: List of abbreviations.
Abbreviation
AI
AoI
AWGN
BCQ
CDF
CQL
AP
C-MARL
CTDE
DNN
DQN
DRL
GAN
GNN
I-MARL
ITLinQ
MARL
MDP
OOD
PF
PO-MDP
RRM
RSRP
RW
SAC
SON
TDM
UAV
UE

Description
Artificial intelligent
Age-of-information
additive white Gaussian noise
Behavior constrained Q-learning
Cumulative distribution function
Conservative Q-learning
Access point
Centralized multi-agent reinforcement learning
Centralized training and decentralized execution
Deep neural network
Deep Q-network
Distributional reinforcement learning
Generative adversarial network
Graph neural network
Independent training MARL
Information-theoretic link scheduling
Multi-agent reinforcement learning
Markov decision process
Out-of-distribution
Proportional fairness
Partially-observable Markov decision process
Radio resource management
Reference signal received power
Random-walk
Soft actor-critic
Self-organizing network
Time-division multiplexing
Unmanned aerial vehicles
User equipment

TABLE II: List of symbols and notations.
Symbol
α
β
πi (ai | oi )
ai (t)
A(t)
Cj (t)
C̄j
C̄sum
C̄5%
C̄score
d0
d1
D
hij
I
J
L
N
oi (t)
P Lij
Q(s, a)
r(t)
S(t)
wj (t)

Description
CQL hyperparameter
Discount factor
Policy of agent i
Action of agent i at time step t
Joint action space
Instantaneous rate of UE j
Average rate of UE j
Sum rate
5-percentile rate
Score function
Minimum distance between two APs
Minimum distance between an AP and UE
Offline dataset
channel between UE j and AP i
Number of APs
Number of UEs
Length of the network
Number of top users
Local observations of agent i at time step t
Path loss
Q-function
Immediate reward at time step t
Overall state space
Weighting factor of user j at time t

1) There is a minimum distance d0 between any two APs
di′ i > d0 , ∀ i′ , i ∈ 1, · · · , I, and i′ ̸= i,

present three variants of these offline MARL schemes
using centralized learning, independent learning, and centralized training decentralized execution, respectively.
• We compare the three offline MARL schemes to four
benchmarks from the literature. The proposed MARL
schemes outperform the baseline models regarding both
sum and tail rates.
• We demonstrate that centralized training decentralized
execution approaches overcome the complexity of centralized training MARL and the inefficiency of the independent training MARL. Our algorithm surpasses existing
schemes by more than 50% gain regarding the linear
combination of sum and tail rates.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
introduces the RRM system model. The MARL formulation
is proposed in Section III. Section IV depicts the proposed
offline MARL algorithm. Simulation analysis is presented in
Section V, and the paper is concluded in Section VI. Table I
presents the list of abbreviations, while Table II summarizes
the list of symbols and notations.

where we keep sampling new APs positions until meeting the threshold.
2) There is a minimum distance d1 between each AP and
each UE
dij > d1 , ∀ i ∈ 1, · · · , I, and ∀ j ∈ 1, · · · , J,

(2)

where we keep sampling new UEs positions until meeting the threshold.
3) All UEs are prohibited from moving outside the network’s borders, where we consider a bounce back when
a UE aims to move outside the borders.
The received signal of UE j from AP i at time t is
X
yj (t) = hij (t)xi (t) +
hi′ j (t)xi′ (t) + nj (t),

(3)

i′ ̸=i

where nj (t) is the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
whose power is σ 2 and the channel between AP i and UE j
is denoted as hij and comprises:
•

path-loss: we follow the 3GPP indoor model [34]
P Lij = 15.3 + 37.6 log(dij ) + 10,

II. S YSTEM M ODEL
Consider the downlink of a cellular system as illustrated
in Fig. 1. Assume an L × L square network, and consider J
user equipment (UEs) transmit their data to I access points
(APs) during T discrete time intervals, forming an episode.
At the beginning of each episode, APs and UEs are randomly
deployed following a uniform distribution on the coordinates.
During each episode, the position of each AP is fixed, while
UEs move randomly within the network’s borders with a fixed
velocity vt ∈ [0, 1] m/s. To elaborate on a practical scenario,
we set three thresholds:

(1)

(4)

shadowing: we consider the log-normal effect with a
standard deviation σsh [34], and
• short-term fading: we consider frequency-flat Rayleigh
fading on all links in the network.
•

Each UE is associated with one of the APs at the beginning
of each episode according to the reference signal received
power (RSRP) [35]. In other words, a UE j is associated with
AP i that records the max RSRP among all APs
i = arg max
RSRPi′ j ,
′
i

∀ i′ ∈ {1, · · · , I}.

(5)

4

where µ1 ∈ R+ and µ2 ∈ R+ are user chosen parameters.
We are now ready to cast the RRM problem as

bounce back

velocity 𝑣Ԧ

P1 : max
A

backhaul

UEj
velocity 𝑣Ԧ

APi

Fig. 1: A wireless environment consists of I APs and J UEs. Each UE is
associated with only one AP , which chooses one of its associated UEs to
serve at a time.

Then, each time t, each user selects one of its associated UEs
to serve. To this end, the instantaneous rate and SINR of UE
j that is associated with AP i are, respectively,

Cj (t) = log2 1 + γj (t) ,
(6)
2
|hij (t)| pt
γj (t) = P
,
(7)
2
2
′
i′ ̸=i |hi j (t)| pt + σ

C̄j =

T t=1

Cj (t).

(8)

To simplify the notation, time-dependent variables will be
referred to without explicitly indicating the time dependency
(t), assuming it remains implicit unless specified otherwise.
A. Problem Formulation
The main objective in RRM problems is to find the optimal
serving policy for each AP that maximizes the average rate
across all users. However, simply formulating the problem to
maximize (8) leads to a solution that invariably favors the user
with the best SINR, thus disregarding fairness across users.
To address this, the problem formulation should balance the
sum and tail rate, ensuring a more equitable distribution of
resources across all users.
Bearing this in mind, the sum rate is
Csum =

J
X

C̄j ,

(9)

j=1

whereas the tail rate, i.e., the 5-percentile rate, is formulated
as
C5% = max C s.t. P[C̄j ≥ C] ≥ 0.95, ∀j ∈ {1, · · · , J}. (10)
Next, we define the score function, Cscore , as the linear
combination of these rates
Cscore = µ1 Csum + µ2 C5% ,

Cscore ,

(11)

(12)

t=1

where A (defined in Section III) is the action space that
describes the jointly serving policies of all APs.
Directly optimizing (12) imposes several challenges due to
time dependency between actions that affect both sum and
tail rates. In addition, the 5-percentile rate is challenging to
optimize due to its instability as it can not be formulated in
a closed form as a function of the system parameters. Alternatively, the authors in [26] proposed a more sophisticated
approach to address this complex optimization. Consider the
weighting factor wj (t) of user j at time t, which can be
recursively obtained as
wj (t) =

1
,
C̃j (t)

(13)

C̃j (t) = η Cj (t) + (1 − η) C̃j (t − 1),
C̃j (0) = Cj (0),
where η is a running average parameter and C̃j is the longterm average rate of user j at time t. The proportional fairness
(PF) ratio PFj of user j at time t is defined as the product of
(13), the weighting factor, and (6), the instantaneous rate,
PFj = wj Cj .

where pt is the transmit power.
Then, in an episode, the average rate of UE j, C̄j , is
T
1X

T
X

(14)

The PF factor indicates that if a user has low rates for a long
time, its PF factor increases subsequently. Optimizing the PF
factor is easier and directly influences the objective function,
maximizing the score function, Cscore . The optimization problem is now formulated as
P1 : max
A

T X
J
X

(wj )λ · Cj ,

(15)

t=1 j=1

where λ ∈ [0, 1] controls the trade-off between the sum-rate
and the 5-percentile rate.
Following [26] and to generalize the problem, we use the
PF ratio to prioritize the associated UEs of each AP to limit
the number of UEs that each AP can choose from to N users
at each time t. These N UEs are the top N in PF ratios among
all the associated UEs to a specific AP. This step is common in
unifying the action space size among network configurations.
III. MARL F ORMULATION
In this section, we formulate the problem using a partially
observable Markov decision process (PO-MDP) and present
an online solution using MARL.
A. Partially-Observable Markov Decision Process
To solve the optimization problem in (12), we rely on
MARL. In particular, we assume each AP is an individual
agent contributing to his policy toward maximizing the score
function. In PO-MDP, each agent i observes his local observation oi , takes an action ai , and receives a reward r. Jointly,

5

the local observations of all agents together form the state
space, and the actions of all agents form the action space A.
Sharing the local observations among all agents converts the
problem into fully observable MDP. The PO-MDP formulation
is detailed as follows:
1) Local Observations: Each agent i observes a tuple
comprised of the SINR, γj , of its top N users and
their weighting factor wj . Then, each AP has a local
observation oi = ((γi,1 , wi,1 ), · · · , (γi,N , wi,N )) whose
size is 2 × N . The state space is the concatenation of
all local observations S = (o1 , · · · , oI ) whose size is
2 × N × I, i.e., the local observations of all I APs.
2) Actions: The action space of each agent ai at time t
comprises the UEs among its top N users chosen to be
served and additional silent action (the agent turned itself
off). The size of the individual action space is N + 1.
The joint action space A = (a1 , · · · , aI ) has a size of
(N + 1) × I.
3) Rewards: We use a joint centralized reward function
based on the actions of all APs. The reward is
r=

J
X

wjλ Cj .

(16)

j=1

4) Policies: Each agent’s policy, denoted as πi (oi |ai ), maps
the chosen action at each visiting observation. The
global policy of the environment π(S|A) maps the joint
action to the global state. The goal is to find the optimal
global policy that maximizes the rewards.
B. Online RL
Online RL, especially deep RL, efficiently solves complex
and large-scale problems, such as the presented RRM problem.
In this subsection, we define the preliminaries of singleagent RL needed to better define the proposed offline MARL
scheme. In this work, we choose discrete SAC (an actor-critic
algorithm for environments with discrete actions) [36] as our
online RL algorithm due to its stability compared to DQN,
which usually sticks to local minimums and saddle points.
SAC is a model-free, off-policy RL algorithm that optimizes
the current policy by utilizing experiences from previous visits
(across various policies). It uniquely maximizes the policy’s
rewards and entropy, promoting continuous and random exploration of the environment. This dual objective ensures that
SAC seeks optimal actions and maintains sufficient exploration
to avoid local optima. Actor-critic architectures rely on policy
evaluation and policy improvement alternately [37]. SAC
computes the Q-function iteratively via the policy evaluation
loss
"
#

 (k) ′ ′
2
Leval =Ê r+β Êa′ ∼πk (a′ |s′ ) Q̂ (s , a )−Q(s, a)
, (17)

policy towards maximizing the expected Q-function through
the policy improvement loss
"
#
Limp = − Êa∼πk (s|a) Q̂k (s, a) − log π(a|s) ,

(18)

where the term log π(a|s) is the entropy regularization parameter, and the policy π(a|s) is usually modelled as a neural
network parameterized by weights ϕ.

C. Online MARL
Multiple agents cooperate toward the joint goal in the cooperative multi-agent RL setting. There are numerous variants
of the MARL problem:
1) Centralized MARL (C-MARL): In this MARL setting, all
agents are considered as one agent with one joint observation
(state space) and one joint action space. The target is to find
the optimal joint policy π that maps the state space to the joint
action space. Then, individual policies are extracted from the
joint policy. Hence, the loss equations for the SAC algorithm
in that case is
"
#

2
C
(k)
′ ′
Leval = Ê r+β ÊA′ ∼πk (A′ |S ′ ) Q̂ (S ,A )−Q(S,A) , (19)
where Q̂(k) is the current estimate of the joint Q-function at
iteration step k. Similarly, the policy improvement loss for
each agent is computed as follows:
#
"
LCimp = − ÊA∼πk (A|S) Q̂k (S, A) − log π(S|A) .

(20)

C-MARL efficiently finds the optimal policies as it utilizes all
agents’ information jointly but at the cost of high complexity
due to the vast state and action space dimensions.
2) Independent Training MARL (I-MARL): In I-MARL,
each agent individually optimizes its policy using a distinct
neural network that maps its observations to its action space.
Consequently, each agent independently implements its own
SAC algorithm, relying solely on its observations, actions, and
accumulated experiences to refine its strategy. Thus, the policy
evaluation loss of each agent is computed as
"
#

2
(k) ′ ′
I
Leval = Ê r+β Êa′i ∼πik (a′i |o′i )Q̂i (oi ,ai )−Qi (oi ,ai ) , (21)
(k)

where Q̂i is the current estimate of the Q-function of agent
i at iteration step k. Similarly, the policy improvement loss
for each agent is computed as follows:
"
#
k

where Ê[·] is the empirical expectation over samples
(s, a, r, s′ ), Q̂(k) is the current estimate of the Q-function Q
at iteration step k, s′ is the next state, a′ is the next action,
and the Q-function Q(s, a) is usually modeled as a neural
network parameterized by weights θ. The latter updates the

LIimp = − Êai ∼πik (oi |ai ) Q̂i (oi , ai ) − log πi (ai |oi ) . (22)
I-MARL overcomes the complexity of C-MARL. However, it
performs worse than C-MARL due to the missing information
about the observations of other agents.

6

Agent 1

⋯

Agent I

Agent 1

⋯

Agent I

Agent 1

⋯

Agent I

𝑜1

⋯

𝑜𝐼

𝑜1

⋯

𝑜𝐼

𝑜1

⋯

𝑜𝐼

𝑎1

𝑆

𝑎𝐼

𝑎1

𝑎𝐼

𝑎1

𝑎𝐼

𝐴
⋯

𝑄

⋯

𝑄1

⋯

𝑄𝑁

𝜋1

⋯

𝜋𝑁

𝑄1

⋯

𝑄𝑁

During training

𝜋1

⋯

𝜋𝑁

𝜋
⋯

𝜋1

𝜋𝑁

Centralized MARL

Independent MARL

CTDE MARL

Fig. 2: An illustrative comparison between centralized MARL, independent MARL, and centralized training decentralized execution MARL. As shown,
C-MARL models a joint Q-function using a single neural network, and the policies are drawn from the joint Q-function. In contrast, in I-MARL and CTDEMARL, each agent models its Q-function as an independent neural network.

3) Centralized training decentralized execution MARL
(CTDE-MARL): In the CTDE setting, value decomposition
[38] approximates the global value function through the sum
of the individual action-value functions of each agent, i.e.,
Qtot (s) =

I
X

i

Q̃ (oi ),

(23)

i=1

where Q̃i (oi ) represents the contribution of each agent to the
global Q-function. In this framework, a joint policy evaluation
loss is calculated based on the critical contributions of each
agent, while each agent independently computes its policy
improvement loss. The CTDE-MARL evaluation loss is
"
I

X
(k)
CTDE
Leval = Ê r + β Êa′i ∼πik (a′i |o′i )
Q̂i (o′i , a′i )
(24)
i=1

−

I
X

Q̃i (oi , ai )

2

#
.

i=1

Then, the policy of each agent is obtained from the optimized
function Q̃i (oi , ai ) as


πi (ai |oi ) = 1 ai = arg max Q̃i (oi , ai ) .
(25)
ai

During execution, each agent uses his policy in a decentralized
fashion. CTDE-MARL overcomes the complexity of C-MARL
and the inefficiency of I-MARL.
Fig. 2 illustrates the three online MARL variants: C-MARL,
I-MARL, and CTDE-MARL, graphically highlighting their
similarities and differences. Note that each agent calculates its
action-value functions in I-MARL and CTDE-MARL. However, CTDE-MARL improves upon I-MARL by aggregating
the individual action-value functions to contribute to a global

action-value function during training, as denoted in (23) and
(24). This approach enhances coordination among agents by
aligning their objectives toward the global objective.
IV. O FFLINE MARL
In the previous section, we presented online MARL and
its variants. This section presents the proposed offline MARL
scheme for the RRM problem. As shown in Fig. 3, offline
RL / MARL utilizes static offline dataset without any reliance
on online interaction with the environment [16]. This offline
dataset is collected using behavioral policies from benchmark
algorithms or random exploration. Since offline MARL only
uses offline datasets, it removes the burden of online interaction in the RRM problem. For instance, to reach a sub-optimal
policy in MARL algorithms, the agents need a large amount
of online interaction with the environment. Therefore, the
agents must visit as many state-action pairs as possible, which
is costly regarding time and computations. Moreover, online
MARL requires a high level of synchronization between the
agents using a central unit that collects the agent’s actions and
re-distributes the calculated rewards. This creates a challenging
communication overhead problem, which becomes even more
cumbersome when information sharing is needed among the
agents or centralized training.
Simply training the online SAC algorithm (described in
Section III-B) with an offline dataset usually fails. This failure
occurs because of the optimistic evaluation of the algorithm
caused by the distributional shift between the learned and
deployed actions, called out-of-distribution (OOD) actions.
However, recent advances in offline RL and offline MARL
overcome this issue and have enabled deep RL and deep
MARL algorithms to be used offline. For instance, behaviorconstrained Q-learning (BCQ) [39] solved the OOD problem

7

Training
dataset 𝒟

Optimum
policies
𝝅∗

Online
interaction

𝒟

Optimum
policies

𝝅∗

𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑟𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡+1

Offline data
collection

Online MARL

Online
deployment

Offline MARL

Fig. 3: An illustrative comparison between online MARL and offline MARL. Online MARL utilizes online interaction with the environment to optimize the
policies. In contrast, offline MARL exploits offline datasets pre-collected using a behavioral policy. Offline MARL training uses the offline dataset, whereas
optimum policies are used for online deployment.

Algorithm 1: Centralized multi-agent reinforcement
learning using conservative Q-learning (C-MARLCQL) algorithm.
Input: Discount factor β, conservative penalty constant
α, number of agents I, number of training iterations
K, number of gradient steps G, and offline dataset D
Initialize network parameters
for iteration k in {1,...,K} do
for gradient step g in {1,...,G} do
Sample a batch B from the dataset D
Estimate the C-MARL-CQL loss LCCQL in (26)
Estimate the policy improvement loss LCimp
using (20)
Perform a stochastic gradient step based on the
estimated losses.
end
end

by limiting the distance between the selected actions for the
policy to those in the dataset. In contrast, conservative Qlearning (CQL) [19] adds a regularization term to the loss
function to penalize large deviations between the selected
actions and the actions in the dataset.
Next, we revise these algorithms in light of the RRM
problem proposed in Section II and the SAC architecture
discussed in Section III.

A. Conservative Q-Learning
In this work, we choose the CQL algorithm as the offline
MARL approach for solving the RRM problem due to its
robust performance on various offline RL / MARL problems.
In addition, we introduce a new variation of the algorithm
as we build the CQL algorithm on top of SAC architecture.
As in the online case, next, we assess the algorithm for three
variants: centralized (C), independent (I), and CTDE.
1) C-MARL-CQL: To implement the CQL algorithm in the
C-MARL setting, which we refer to as C-MARL-CQL, the

Algorithm 2: Independent multi-agent reinforcement
learning using conservative Q-learning (I-MARLCQL) algorithm.
Input: Discount factor β, conservative penalty constant
α, number of agents I, number of training iterations
K, number of gradient steps G, and offline dataset D
Initialize networks parameters
for iteration k in {1,...,K} do
for gradient step g in {1,...,G} do
Sample a batch B from the dataset D
for agent i in {1,...,I} do
Estimate the I-MARL-CQL loss LICQL
using (27)
Estimate the policy improvement loss LIimp
using (22)
Perform a stochastic gradient step based on
the estimated losses.
end
end
end

policy improvement loss is calculated as
 X



1
LCCQL = LCeval +αÊ log
exp Q(S, A) − Q(S, A) ,
2
A
(26)
h
i

P
where the term αÊ log
A exp Q(S, A) − Q(S, A) is the
regularization term (KL-divergence) and α > 0 is a constant.
Then, the policy improvement is performed using (20) as in
the online case. The C-MARL-CQL procedure is detailed in
Algorithm 1.
2) I-MARL-CQL: To implement the CQL algorithm in the
I-MARL setting, named I-MARL-CQL, each agent i computes
its policy improvement loss as
 X



1 I
I
exp Qi (oi ,ai ) −Qi (oi , ai ) ,
LCQL= Leval +αÊ log
2
a
i

(27)
h
i

P
where the term αÊ log
ai exp Qi (oi , ai ) − Qi (oi , ai )
is the regularization term for each agent. Then, the policy

8

Algorithm 3: Centralized training decentralized execution multi-agent reinforcement learning using conservative Q-learning (CTDE-MARL-CQL) algorithm.
Input: Discount factor β, conservative penalty constant
α, number of agents I, number of training iterations
K, number of gradient steps G, and offline dataset D
Initialize networks parameters
for iteration k in {1,...,K} do
for gradient step g in {1,...,G} do
Sample a batch B from the dataset D
Estimate the CTDE-MARL-CQL loss LCTDE
CQL
using (28)
for agent i in {1,...,I} do
Estimate the policy improvement loss LIimp
using (22)
end
Perform a stochastic gradient step based on the
estimated losses.
end
end

improvement is performed using (22), as in the online case.
Algorithm 2 details the I-MARL-CQL algorithm.
3) CTDE-MARL-CQL: Finally, the CQL loss in the CTDE
form, which we call CTDE-MARL-CQL, is formulated as
1 CTDE
LCTDE
(28)
CQL = Leval
2
X


I 
X
+αÊ
log
exp(Q̃i (oi , ai )) − Q̃i (oi , ai ) .
i=1

ai

The policy improvement is performed using (22) for each
agent. Lastly, the CTDE-MARL-CQL algorithm is detailed in
Algorithm 3.
We highlight that the key difference between each offline
MARL scheme and its corresponding online MARL scheme
is the carefully designed conservative term in the offline case,
which pushes the learned policy close to the behavioral policy
in the dataset. Therefore, Algorithms 1 to 3 can be converted
to the online counterpart by replacing in the appropriate policy
evaluation loss function. Note that for the C-MARL-CQL, a
single neural network is used to model the Q-function (i.e., the
policy), whereas, in CTDE-MARL-CQL and I-MARL-CQL,
each agent models its neural network.
V. N UMERICAL R ESULTS
This section presents the numerical analysis of the designed
offline MARL algorithms for the RRM problem. First, we
present the implementation and the baseline models, then show
the experimental results of the proposed model compared to
the baseline models.
A. Implementation and Baseline Models
We consider a 100 m × 100 m square area with I = 4
APs (agents) and J = 20 UEs. At the beginning of each
episode, one random environment is sampled with different AP
positions and UEs’ initial positions. Each episode consists of

200 time steps. We use 2 hidden layers in actor and critic with
256 neurons each. All simulations are performed on a single
NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU using the Pytorch framework.
Simulation parameters are shown in Table III. First, we show
TABLE III: Simulation parameters
Parameter

Value

Parameter

Value

I
N
d0
v(t)
pt
µ1
λ
α
Actor lr
Layers
Optimizer

4
3
10 m
1 m/s
10 dBm
1/
M
0.8
1
1e − 5
2
Adam

J
L
d1
P Lo
T
µ2
β
Replay memory
Critic lr
Neurons
Activation

20
100
1m
10 dB
200
3
0.99
105
1e − 4
256
ReLu

the performance of online C-MARL (SAC) compared to the
baseline models and the famous online C-MARL (DQN) as
a learning-based baseline. Afterward, we compared the online
performance to C-MARL-CQL (SAC). Then, we present the
performance of the proposed offline MARL schemes, i.e., CMARL-CQL (SAC), I-MARL-CQL (SAC), and CTDE-MARLCQL (SAC). Using SAC as our deep RL framework, we always
compare it to DQN. In our simulation, we use (SAC) after the
name of the algorithm to refer to a scheme built on top of SAC
architecture and (DQN) after the name of the algorithm to refer
to a scheme built on top of the traditional DQN architecture.
Finally, we show the effect of the quality and size of the dataset
on the offline training.
We collect different offline datasets using the experience of
an C-MARL (SAC) agent and different sub-optimal benchmarks, respectively. Since the performance of the offline
MARL algorithms is sensitive to the quality of the offline
dataset, we adopt the online centralized MARL approach to
collect good-quality data points. In addition, we test the effect
of the size of the dataset on the performance of offline MARL
schemes by collecting datasets with different sizes.
Besides the three developed MARL algorithms, namely
C-MARL-CQL, I-MARL-CQL, and CTDE-MARL-CQL, we
show the performance of four benchmarks from the literature:
1) Random-walk (RW): At each time step t, each AP
chooses randomly to serve one of its top N UEs.
2) Greedy: In the greedy method, each agent serves the
user with the highest SINR among its top N users at
each time step t.
3) Time-division multiplexing (TDM): At each time step
t, all UEs are served equally, where each AP serves the
UEs in a round-robin manner.
4) Information-theoretic link scheduling (ITLinQ): It
was proved in [40], that ITLinQ algorithm reaches a
sub-optimal policy. At each time step t, each AP sorts
its top N UEs regarding their PF ratios. Then, each
AP performs an interference tolerance check for each
UE to ensure that the interference level is lower than a
threshold M SNRηmn . This AP is turned off if no UEs
have lower interference than the threshold.

Rsum

Rsum

9

C-MARL (SAC)
C-MARL (DQN)
ITLinQ

Greedy
TDM
RW

C-MARL-CQL (SAC)
C-MARL-CQL (DQN)
C-MARL (SAC)
C-MARL (DQN)

Rperc

Epochs

(a) Rsum

Rperc

Epochs

(a) Rsum

ITLinQ
Greedy
TDM
RW

C-MARL (SAC)
C-MARL (DQN)
ITLinQ

C-MARL-CQL (SAC)
C-MARL-CQL (DQN)
C-MARL (SAC)
C-MARL (DQN)

Greedy
TDM
RW

Rscore

Epochs

(b) Rperc

Rscore

Epochs

(b) Rperc

ITLinQ
Greedy
TDM
RW

C-MARL (SAC)
C-MARL (DQN)
ITLinQ

Greedy
TDM
RW

C-MARL-CQL (SAC)
C-MARL-CQL (DQN)
C-MARL (SAC)
C-MARL (DQN)

Epochs

Epochs

(c) Rscore

(c) Rscore

Fig. 4: The sum rate, 5-percentile rate, and Rscore reported for C-MARL
algorithm built on top of both SAC and DQN compared to other benchmark
schemes.

B. Online Training and Dataset Collection
In Fig. 4, we show the training performance of a C-MARL
(SAC) agent compared to the baseline schemes. In addition, we

ITLinQ
Greedy
TDM
RW

Fig. 5: The sum rate, 5-percentile rate, and Rscore reported for the proposed
C-MARL-CQL algorithm built on top of SAC and DQN compared to CMARL and other benchmark schemes.

compare the developed C-MARL (SAC) scheme to a famous
online RL algorithm, C-MARL (DQN) scheme, as a learningbased benchmark. First, the RW has the worst sum rate, 5-

10

Rsum

percentile rate, and Rscore. The greedy algorithm maximizes
the sum rate at the expense of the 5-percentile rate. In contrast,
the TDM scheme prioritizes maximizing the 5-percentile rate
over the sum rate. The ITLinQ benchmark has the highest
Rscore among other baselines. The two online RL schemes,
namely, C-MARL (SAC) and C-MARL (DQN), have the
highest Rscore compared to all the baselines. We can notice in
Fig. 4a that the C-MARL (DQN) agent scores the largest sum
rate, whereas the C-MARL (SAC) agent maintains a relatively
good sum rate compared to other benchmarks. In contrast,
the 5-percentile rate of the C-MARL (DQN) agent drops
noticeably compared to C-MARL (SAC), whose 5-percentile
rate is around 0.28, as shown in Fig. 4b. As a result, C-MARL
(SAC) has a better overall Rscore than C-MARL (DQN), as
in Fig. 4c.

C-MARL-CQL (SAC)
CTDE-MARL-CQL (SAC)
I-MARL-CQL (SAC)
C-MARL (SAC)
C-MARL (DQN)

Episodes

(a) Rsum

In the next experiment in Fig. 5, we show the performance
of the proposed C-MARL-CQL (SAC) algorithm in terms of
the sum rate, 5-percentile rate, and Rscore. We compare the
proposed algorithm to the traditional C-MARL-CQL (DQN),
C-MARL (SAC), C-MARL (DQN) and other baselines as
benchmarks to better evaluate it. In this experiment, we use the
dataset, which is 16000 data points, collected from an online
SAC agent. In addition, we perform centralized training, i.e.,
C-MARL-CQL. As shown in Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b, and similar to the online case, the C-MARL-CQL (DQN) algorithm
prefers to maximize the sum rate over the 5-percentile rate,
where the proposed C-MARL-CQL (SAC) algorithm sacrifices
the sum rate to enhance the 5-percentile rate. In Fig. 5c, the CMARL-CQL (SAC) algorithm outperforms the C-MARL-CQL
(DQN) scheme, surpassing other baselines, including online
benchmarks.

Rperc

C. Offline Centralized Training

C-MARL-CQL (SAC)
CTDE-MARL-CQL (SAC)
I-MARL-CQL (SAC)

C-MARL (SAC)
C-MARL (DQN)

Episodes

(b) Rperc

In Fig. 6, we report the rates of the proposed offline MARL
schemes, namely, C-MARL-CQL, I-MARL-CQL and CTDEMARL-CQL built on top of SAC architecture, compared to
C-MARL (SAC) and C-MARL (DQN) as two benchmark
schemes. We construct the three schemes on top of SAC
architecture due to its stable and high rate convergence. As
in Fig. 6a, the three MARL schemes almost achieve the
same sum rate, outperforming C-MARL (SAC). In contrast,
C-MARL-CQL (SAC) has the highest 5-percentile rate, relying on the availability of complete observations of all
agents to find the optimum policies. Comparing CTDEMARL-CQL (SAC) to I-MARL-CQL (SAC), we observe
that CTDE-MARL-CQL (SAC), due to value function sharing among agents, approaches the 5-percentile rate of CMARL-CQL (SAC) with lower complexity, especially in execution. Hence, CTDE-MARL-CQL (SAC) outperforms CMARL (SAC) Rscore with a tiny gap with C-MARL-CQL
(SAC), as shown in Fig. 6c. This highlights the ability of the
CTDE framework to overcome the complexity of centralized
training and the poor performance of independent training.

Rscore

D. Offline MARL Schemes

C-MARL-CQL (SAC)
CTDE-MARL-CQL (SAC)
I-MARL-CQL (SAC)
C-MARL (SAC)
C-MARL (DQN)

Episodes

(c) Rscore
Fig. 6: The sum rate, 5-percentile rate, and Rscore reported for the proposed
C-MARL-CQL, I-MARL-CQL and CTDE-MARL-CQL built on top of SAC
architecture.

E. Dataset Quality
Finally, we show the effect of the quality of the dataset and
its size on the Rscore performance of the proposed CTDE-

11

SAC Dataset
DQN Dataset

Mixed SAC and DQN
Mixed Baselines

converge to a saddle sub-optimal policy. When we increase
the size of the dataset, the Rscore rapidly increases. Datasets
with dimensions larger than 320000 data points influence the
convergence stability without achieving higher Rscore values.

Rscore

VI. C ONCLUSIONS

(a) Dataset Type

160000 Points
320000 Points

Rscore

20000 Points
40000 Points
80000 Points

(b) Dataset Size
Fig. 7: The effect of the dataset on the overall performance of the proposed
CTDE-MARL-CQL (SAC) scheme in terms of the achieved Rscore. Shown
in (a) the effect of the quality of the collected dataset and (b) the effect of
the dataset size.

MARL-CQL (SAC) presented in Fig. 7. In particular, Fig. 7a
compares four sources of the offline dataset, i.e., online SAC,
online DQN, the mixture of online SAC and online DQN, and
the mix of other baselines1 . The quality of the policy used to
collect the offline dataset directly reflects the achieved Rscore.
A dataset collected from a good policy, such as online SAC,
outperforms other datasets collected from online DQN agents
and baseline policies. A mixture of SAC and DQN agents
achieves a high score. This highlights that a mix of good and
bad quality datasets can still be used to find a suitable policy
offline [31].
Similar to Fig. 7a, Fig. 7b shows the effect of the size of
the dataset on the convergence of the Rscore of the proposed
CTDE-MARL-CQL (SAC) algorithm. When using a small
dataset of 20000 points, the Rscore drops to 1, similar to the
performance of TDM. The lack of enough experience creates
optimistic uncertainty in the CQL algorithm, forcing itself to
1 We only include experiences from RW, greedy, TDM, and ITLinQ benchmarks in this dataset.

This paper presents an offline MARL framework based on
the SAC architecture and the CQL algorithm for optimizing
resource management in wireless networks with multiple APs
serving UEs. The framework introduces three variants: CMARL-CQL (centralized training), I-MARL-CQL (independent training), and CTDE-MARL-CQL, tailored to balance
computational complexity and policy performance. Numerical
results demonstrate that the offline MARL framework significantly outperforms baselines, including random-walk, greedy
algorithms, TDM, and ITLinQ, regarding the Rscore metric.
Among the variants, CTDE-MARL-CQL achieves the best
trade-off, offering reduced computational complexity compared to C-MARL-CQL while surpassing I-MARL-CQL in
policy effectiveness. Our analysis also underscores the importance of dataset quality and size in determining algorithm convergence and performance. High-quality behavioral datasets
enhance rate optimization, while larger datasets contribute to
stable convergence. These insights provide valuable guidance
for offline MARL applications in wireless systems.
Future research will focus on extending this work to
meta-offline RL and MARL, enabling dynamic adaptability
to evolving environments and objectives. This direction can
further enhance the scalability and robustness of offline MARL
solutions in complex wireless communication scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1] N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, S. Gong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, Y.-C.
Liang, and D. I. Kim, “Applications of deep reinforcement learning
in communications and networking: A survey,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3133–3174, 2019.
[2] N. H. Mahmood, S. Böcker, I. Moerman, O. A. López, A. Munari,
K. Mikhaylov, F. Clazzer, H. Bartz, O.-S. Park, E. Mercier et al.,
“Machine type communications: key drivers and enablers towards the 6G
era,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking,
vol. 2021, no. 1, p. 134, 2021.
[3] Y. Shi, L. Lian, Y. Shi, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, L. Fu, L. Bai, J. Zhang, and
W. Zhang, “Machine learning for large-scale optimization in 6G wireless
networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 2088–2132, 2023.
[4] E. Eldeeb, M. Shehab, A. E. Kalø r, P. Popovski, and H. Alves, “Traffic
prediction and fast uplink for hidden markov IoT models,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17 172–17 184, 2022.
[5] X. Yi and G. Caire, “ITLinQ+: An improved spectrum sharing mechanism for device-to-device communications,” in 2015 49th Asilomar
Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, 2015, pp. 1310–1314.
[6] A. Gjendemsjo, D. Gesbert, G. E. Oien, and S. G. Kiani, “Binary power
control for sum rate maximization over multiple interfering links,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 3164–3173,
2008.
[7] L. Song, D. Niyato, Z. Han, and E. Hossain, “Game-theoretic resource
allocation methods for device-to-device communication,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 136–144, 2014.
[8] M. Zangooei, N. Saha, M. Golkarifard, and R. Boutaba, “Reinforcement
learning for radio resource management in RAN slicing: A survey,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 118–124, 2023.
[9] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski
et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.

12

[10] M. V. Da Silva, E. Eldeeb, M. Shehab, H. Alves, and R. D. Souza,
“Distributed learning methodologies for massive machine type communication,” Authorea Preprints, 2024.
[11] A. Oroojlooy and D. Hajinezhad, “A review of cooperative multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning,” Applied Intelligence, vol. 53, no. 11, pp.
13 677–13 722, 2023.
[12] A. Tampuu, T. Matiisen, D. Kodelja, I. Kuzovkin, K. Korjus, J. Aru,
J. Aru, and R. Vicente, “Multiagent cooperation and competition with
deep reinforcement learning,” PloS one, vol. 12, no. 4, p. e0172395,
2017.
[13] E. Eldeeb, M. Shehab, and H. Alves, “Traffic learning and proactive
UAV trajectory planning for data uplink in markovian IoT models,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 13 496–13 508, 2024.
[14] S. V. Albrecht, F. Christianos, and L. Schäfer, Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning: Foundations and Modern Approaches. MIT Press, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://www.marl-book.com
[15] P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. Zambaldi,
M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Sonnerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, and
T. Graepel, “Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent
learning,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05296
[16] S. Levine, A. Kumar, G. Tucker, and J. Fu, “Offline reinforcement
learning: Tutorial, review, and perspectives on open problems,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
[17] I. Kostrikov, A. Nair, and S. Levine, “Offline reinforcement
learning with implicit Q-learning,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2110.06169
[18] J. Schulman, S. Levine, P. Abbeel, M. Jordan, and P. Moritz, “Trust
region policy optimization,” in International conference on machine
learning. PMLR, 2015, pp. 1889–1897.
[19] A. Kumar, A. Zhou, G. Tucker, and S. Levine, “Conservative Q-learning
for offline reinforcement learning,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp.
1179–1191. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper
files/paper/2020/file/0d2b2061826a5df3221116a5085a6052-Paper.pdf
[20] M. Bennis, S. M. Perlaza, P. Blasco, Z. Han, and H. V. Poor, “Selforganization in small cell networks: A reinforcement learning approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 12, no. 7, pp.
3202–3212, 2013.
[21] X. Li, J. Fang, W. Cheng, H. Duan, Z. Chen, and H. Li, “Intelligent
power control for spectrum sharing in cognitive radios: A deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 25 463–25 473,
2018.
[22] E. Eldeeb, J. M. de Souza Sant’Ana, D. E. Pérez, M. Shehab, N. H.
Mahmood, and H. Alves, “Multi-UAV path learning for age and power
optimization in IoT with UAV battery recharge,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 5356–5360, 2022.
[23] Y. Hua, R. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Chen, and H. Zhang, “GAN-Powered Deep
Distributional Reinforcement Learning for Resource Management in
Network Slicing,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 334–349, 2020.
[24] N. NaderiAlizadeh, M. Eisen, and A. Ribeiro, “Learning resilient
radio resource management policies with graph neural networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 71, pp. 995–1009, 2023.
[25] E. Eldeeb, M. Shehab, and H. Alves, “Age minimization in massive IoT
via UAV swarm: A multi-agent reinforcement learning approach,” in
2023 IEEE 34th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor
and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2023, pp. 1–6.
[26] N. Naderializadeh, J. J. Sydir, M. Simsek, and H. Nikopour, “Resource
management in wireless networks via multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20,
no. 6, pp. 3507–3523, 2021.
[27] Y. S. Nasir and D. Guo, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
for dynamic power allocation in wireless networks,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 37, no. 10, pp. 2239–2250,
2019.
[28] S. Hwang, H. Kim, H. Lee, and I. Lee, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning for distributed resource management in wirelessly powered
communication networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 14 055–14 060, 2020.
[29] X. Du, T. Wang, Q. Feng, C. Ye, T. Tao, L. Wang, Y. Shi, and
M. Chen, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning for dynamic resource
management in 6G in-X subnetworks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1900–1914, 2023.
[30] E. Eldeeb, H. Sifaou, O. Simeone, M. Shehab, and H. Alves, “Conservative and risk-aware offline multi-agent reinforcement learning for
digital twins,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08421, 2024.

[31] K. Yang, C. Shi, C. Shen, J. Yang, S.-p. Yeh, and J. J. Sydir, “Offline
reinforcement learning for wireless network optimization with mixture
datasets,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, pp. 1–1,
2024.
[32] E. Eldeeb and H. Alves, “Offline and distributional reinforcement
learning for radio resource management,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.16764
[33] L. Meng, M. Wen, C. Le, X. Li, D. Xing, W. Zhang, Y. Wen, H. Zhang,
J. Wang, Y. Yang et al., “Offline pre-trained multi-agent decision
transformer,” Machine Intelligence Research, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 233–
248, 2023.
[34] 3GPP, “Simulation assumptions and parameters for FDD HeNB RF
requirements,” Tech. Rep. R4-092042.
[35] ——, “NR; physical layer measurements,” Technical specification (TS)
8.215 V18.4.0, 2024-12.
[36] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic:
Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a
stochastic actor,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 80. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018, pp. 1861–1870. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/haarnoja18b.html
[37] ——, “Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep
reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor,” in Proceedings
of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 80.
PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018, pp. 1861–1870. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/haarnoja18b.html
[38] J. Su, S. Adams, and P. Beling, “Value-decomposition multi-agent actorcritics,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
vol. 35, no. 13, 2021, pp. 11 352–11 360.
[39] S. Fujimoto, D. Meger, and D. Precup, “Off-policy deep reinforcement
learning without exploration,” in Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 97. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019, pp. 2052–2062.
[Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/fujimoto19a.html
[40] N. Naderializadeh and A. S. Avestimehr, “ITLinQ: A new approach for
spectrum sharing in device-to-device communication systems,” in 2014
IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2014, pp. 1573–
1577.

