Automatic Goal Generation for
Reinforcement Learning Agents

Carlos Florensa * 1 David Held * 2 Xinyang Geng * 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 3

arXiv:1705.06366v5 [cs.LG] 23 Jul 2018

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful technique to train an agent to perform a task; however,
an agent that is trained using RL is only capable
of achieving the single task that is specified via its
reward function. Such an approach does not scale
well to settings in which an agent needs to perform a diverse set of tasks, such as navigating to
varying positions in a room or moving objects to
varying locations. Instead, we propose a method
that allows an agent to automatically discover the
range of tasks that it is capable of performing
in its environment. We use a generator network
to propose tasks for the agent to try to accomplish, each task being specified as reaching a certain parametrized subset of the state-space. The
generator network is optimized using adversarial
training to produce tasks that are always at the
appropriate level of difficulty for the agent, thus
automatically producing a curriculum. We show
that, by using this framework, an agent can efficiently and automatically learn to perform a wide
set of tasks without requiring any prior knowledge of its environment, even when only sparse
rewards are available. Videos and code available
at: https://sites.google.com/view/
goalgeneration4rl.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) can be used to train an agent
to perform a task by optimizing a reward function. Recently,
a number of impressive results have been demonstrated by
training agents using RL: such agents have been trained
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
UC Berkeley 2 Department of Computer Science, CMU
3
International Computer Science Institute (ICSI). Correspondence to: Carlos Florensa <florensa@berkeley.edu>, David Held
<dheld@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

to defeat a champion Go player (Silver et al., 2016), to
outperform humans in 49 Atari games (Guo et al., 2016;
Mnih et al., 2015), and to perform a variety of difficult
robotics tasks (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Duan et al., 2016;
Levine et al., 2016). In each of the above cases, the agent
is trained to optimize a single reward function in order to
learn to perform a single task. However, there are many
real-world environments in which a robot will need to be
able to perform not a single task but a diverse set of tasks,
such as navigating to varying positions in a room or moving
objects to varying locations. We consider the problem of
maximizing the average success rate of our agent over all
possible goals, where success is defined as the probability
of successfully reaching each goal by the current policy.
In order to efficiently maximize this objective, the algorithm
must intelligently choose which goals to focus on at every
training stage: goals should be at the appropriate level of
difficulty for the current policy. To do so, our algorithm
allows an agent to generate its own reward functions, defined
with respect to target subsets of the state space, called goals.
We generate such goals using a Goal Generative Adversarial
Network (Goal GAN), a variation of to the GANs introduced
by Goodfellow et al. (2014). A goal discriminator is trained
to evaluate whether a goal is at the appropriate level of
difficulty for the current policy, and a goal generator is
trained to generate goals that meet this criteria. We show
that such a framework allows an agent to quickly learn a
policy that reaches all feasible goals in its environment, with
no prior knowledge about the environment or the tasks being
performed. Our method automatically creates a curriculum,
in which, at each step, the generator generates goals that
are only slightly more difficult than the goals that the agent
already knows how to achieve.
In summary, our main contribution is a method for automatic curriculum generation that considerably improves the
sample efficiency of learning to reach all feasible goals in
the environment. Learning to reach multiple goals is useful
for multi-task settings such as navigation or manipulation,
in which we want the agent to perform a wide range of tasks.
Our method also naturally handles sparse reward functions,
without needing to manually modify the reward function
for every task, based on prior task knowledge. Instead, our

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

method dynamically modifies the probability distribution
from which goals are sampled to ensure that the generated
goals are always at the appropriate difficulty level, until the
agent learns to reach all goals within the feasible goal space.

2. Related Work
The problem that we are exploring has been referred to
as “multi-task policy search” (Deisenroth et al., 2014) or
“contextual policy search,” in which the task is viewed as
the context for the policy (Deisenroth et al., 2013; Fabisch
& Metzen, 2014). Unlike the work of Deisenroth et al.
(2014), our work uses a curriculum to perform efficient
multi-task learning, even in sparse reward settings. In contrast to Fabisch & Metzen (2014), which trains from a small
number of discrete contexts / tasks, our method generates a
training curriculum directly in continuous task space.
Intrinsic Motivation: Intrinsic motivation involves learning with an intrinsically specified objective (Schmidhuber,
1991; 2010). Intrinsic motivation has also been studied extensively in the developmental robotics community, such as
SAGG-RIAC (Baranes & Oudeyer, 2010; 2013a), which has
a similar objective of learning to explore a parameterized
task space. However, our experiments with SAGG-RIAC
demonstrate that this approach does not explore the space as
efficiently as ours. A related concept is that of competencebased intrinsic motivation (Baldassarre & Mirolli, 2012),
which uses a selector to select from a discrete set of experts. Recently there have been other formulations of intrinsic motivation, relating to optimizing surprise (Houthooft
et al., 2016; Achiam & Sastry, 2016) or surrogates of statevisitation counts (Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2016).
All these approaches improve learning in sparse tasks where
naive exploration performs poorly. However, these formulations do not have an explicit notion of which states are hard
for the learner, and the intrinsic motivation is independent
of the current performance of the agent. In contrast, our
formulation directly motivates the agent to train on tasks
that push the boundaries of its capabilities.
Skill-learning: We are often interested in training an agent
to perform a collection of tasks rather than a single one, like
reaching different positions in the agent’s state-space. Skill
learning is a common approach to this problem as it allows
the agent to re-use skills, improving learning compared to
training for every task from scratch. Discovering useful
skills is a challenging task that has mostly been studied
for discrete environments (Vigorito & Barto, 2010; Mnih
et al., 2016) or for continuous tasks where demonstrations
are provided (Konidaris et al., 2011; Ranchod et al., 2015).
Recent work overcomes some of these limitations by training low-level modulated locomotor controllers (Heess et al.,
2016), or multimodal policies with an information theoretic
regularizer to learn a fixed-size set of skills (Florensa et al.,

2017a). Nevertheless, in previous work, learning skills is
usually a pre-training step from which useful primitives are
obtained and later used to achieve other tasks. Hence, additional downstream training is required to properly compose
the skills in a purposeful way. On the other hand, our approach trains policies that learn to achieve multiple goals
directly.
Curriculum Learning: The increasing interest on training single agents to perform multiple tasks is leading to
new developments on how to optimally present the tasks
to the agent during learning. The idea of using a curriculum has been explored in many prior works on supervised
learning (Bengio et al., 2009; Zaremba & Sutskever, 2014;
Bengio et al., 2015). However, these curricula are usually
hand-designed, using the expertise of the system designer.
Another line of work uses learning progress to build an automatic curriculum (Graves et al., 2017), however it has
mainly been applied for supervised tasks. Most curriculum
learning in RL still relies on fixed pre-specified sequences of
tasks (Karpathy & Van De Panne, 2012). Other recent work
assumes access to a baseline performance for several tasks
to gauge which tasks are the hardest and require more training (Sharma & Ravindran, 2017), but the framework can
only handle a finite set of tasks and cannot handle sparse rewards. Our method trains a policy that generalizes to a set of
continuously parameterized tasks, and is shown to perform
well even under sparse rewards by not allocating training
effort to tasks that are too hard for the current performance
of the agent. Finally, an interesting self-play strategy has
been proposed that is concurrent to our work (Sukhbaatar
et al., 2017); however, they view their approach as simply
providing an exploration bonus for a single target task; in
contrast, we focus on the problem of efficiently optimizing
a policy across a range of goals.

3. Problem Definition
3.1. Goal-parameterized Reward Functions
In the traditional RL framework, at each timestep t, the
agent in state st ∈ S ⊆ Rn takes an action at ∈ A ⊆ Rm ,
according to some policy π(at | st ) that maps from the
current state st to a probability distribution over actions.
Taking this action causes the agent to enter into a new state
st+1 according to a transition distribution p(st+1 |st , at ),
and receive a reward rt = r(st , at , st+1 ). The objective of
the agent is to find the policy π that maximizes
PTthe expected
return, defined as the sum of rewards R = t=0 rt , where
T is a maximal time given to perform the task. The learned
policy corresponds to maximizing the expected return for a
single reward function.
In our framework, instead of learning to optimize a single
reward function, we consider a range of reward functions

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

rg indexed or parametrized by a goal g ∈ G. Each goal g
corresponds to a set of states S g ⊂ S such that goal g is
considered to be achieved when the agent is in any state
st ∈ S g . Then the objective is to learn a policy that, given
any goal g ∈ G, acts optimally with respect to rg . We define
a very simple reward function that measures whether the
agent has reached the goal:
rg (st , at , st+1 ) = 1{st+1 ∈ S g } ,

(1)

where 1 is the indicator function. In our case, we use S g =
{st : d(f (st ), g) ≤ }, where f (·) is a function that projects
a state into goal space G, d(·, ·) is a distance metric in goal
space, and  is the acceptable tolerance that determines
when the goal is reached. However, our method can handle
generic binary rewards (as in Eq. (1)) and does not require
a distance metric for learning.
Furthermore, we define our MDP such that eachP
episode
T
terminates when st ∈ S g . Thus, the return Rg = t=0 rtg
is a binary random variable whose value indicates whether
the agent has reached the set S g in at most T time-steps.
Policies π(at | st , g) are also conditioned on the current
goal g (as in Schaul et al. (2015)). The expected return
obtained when we take actions sampled from the policy can
then be expressed as the probability of success on that goal
within T time-steps, as shown in Eq. (2).

Rg (π) = Eπ(· | st ,g) 1 ∃ t ∈ [1 . . . T ] : st ∈ S g


= P ∃ t ∈ [1 . . . T ] : st ∈ S g π, g
(2)
The sparse indicator reward function of Eq. (1) is not only
simple but also represents a property of many real-world
goal problems: in many settings, it may be difficult to tell
whether the agent is getting closer to achieving a goal, but
easy to tell when a goal has been achieved (e.g. in a maze).
In theory, one could hand-engineer a meaningful distance
function for each task that could be used to create a dense
reward function. Instead, our method is able to learn simply
using the indicator function of Eq. (1).

3.3. Assumptions
Similar to previous work (Schaul et al., 2015; Kupcsik et al.,
2013; Fabisch & Metzen, 2014; Deisenroth et al., 2014)
we need a continuous goal-space representation such that a
goal-conditioned policy can efficiently generalize over the
goals. In particular, we assume that:
1. A policy trained on a sufficient number of goals in
some area of the goal-space will learn to interpolate to
other goals within that area.
2. A policy trained on some set of goals will provide a
good initialization for learning to reach close-by goals,
meaning that the policy can occasionally reach them
but maybe not consistently.
Furthermore, we assume that if a goal is reachable, there
exists a policy that does so reliably. This is a reasonable
assumption for any practical robotics problem, and it will
be key for our method, as it strives to train on every goal
until it is consistently reached.

4. Method
Our approach can be broken down into three parts: First,
we label a set of goals based on whether they are at the
appropriate level of difficulty for the current policy. Second,
using these labeled goals, we train a generator to output new
goals at the appropriate level of difficulty. Finally, we use
these new goals to efficiently train the policy, improving its
coverage objective. We iterate through each of these steps
until the policy converges.
4.1. Goal Labeling
As shown in our experiments, sampling goals from pg (g)
directly, and training our policy on each sampled goal may
not be the most sample efficient way to optimize the coverage objective of Eq. (3). Instead, we modify the distribution
from which we sample goals during training to be uniform
over the set of Goals of Intermediate Difficulty (GOID):

3.2. Overall Objective
We desire to find a policy π(at | st , g) that achieves a high
reward for many goals g. We assume that there is a test
distribution of goals pg (g) that we would like to perform
well on. For simplicity, we assume that the test distribution
samples goals uniformly from the set of goals G, although in
practice any distribution can be used. The overall objective
is then to find a policy π ∗ such that
π ∗ (at | st , g) = arg max Eg∼pg (·) Rg (π) .
π

(3)

Recall from Eq. (2) that Rg (π) is the probability of success
for each goal g. Thus the objective of Eq. (3) measures the
average probability of success over all goals sampled from
pg (g). We refer to the objective in Eq. (3) as the coverage.

GOIDi := {g : Rmin ≤ Rg (πi ) ≤ Rmax } ⊆ G.

(4)

The justification for this is as follows: due to the sparsity
of the reward function, for most goals g, the current policy
πi (at iteration i) obtains no reward. Instead, we wish to
train our policy on goals g for which πi is able to receive
some minimum expected return Rg (πi ) > Rmin such that
the agent receives enough reward signal for learning. On
the other hand, with this single restriction, we might sample
repeatedly from a small set of already mastered goals. To
force our policy to train on goals that still need improvement, we also ask for Rg (πi ) ≤ Rmax , where Rmax is a
hyperparameter setting a maximum level of performance
above which we prefer to concentrate on new goals. Note

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

that from Eq. (2), Rmin and Rmax can be interpreted as
a minimum and maximum probability of reaching a goal
over T time-steps. Training our policy on goals in GOIDi
allows us to efficiently maximize the coverage objective
of Eq. (3). Therefore, we need to approximate the sampling from GOIDi . We propose to first estimate the label
yg ∈ {0, 1} that indicates whether g ∈ GOIDi for all goals
g used in the previous training iteration, and then use these
labels to train a generative model from where we can sample
goals to train on the next iteration. We estimate the label
of a goal g by computing the fraction of success among all
trajectories that had this goal g during the previous training
iteration, and then check whether this estimate is in between
Rmin and Rmax . In all our experiments we use 0.1 and
0.9 respectively, although the algorithm is very robust to
these hyperparameters (any value of Rmin ∈ (0, 0.25) and
Rmax ∈ (0.75, 1) would yield basically the same result, as
shown in Appendix C)

We directly use the original hyperparameters reported in
Mao et al. (2017) in all our experiments (a = -1, b = 1,
and c = 0). The LSGAN approach gives us a considerable
improvement in training stability over vanilla GAN, and it
has a comparable performance to WGAN (Arjovsky et al.,
2017). However, unlike in the original LSGAN paper (Mao
et al., 2017), we have three terms in our value function
V (D) rather than the original two. For goals g for which
yg = 1, the second term disappears and we are left with
only the first and third terms, which are identical to that of
the original LSGAN framework. Viewed in this manner,
the discriminator is trained to discriminate between goals
from pdata (g) with a label yg = 1 and the generated goals
G(z). Looking at the second term, our discriminator is also
trained with “negative examples” with a label yg = 0 which
our generator should not generate. The generator is trained
to “fool” the discriminator, i.e. to output goals that match
the distribution of goals in pdata (g) for which yg = 1.

4.2. Adversarial Goal Generation

4.3. Policy Optimization

In order to sample new goals g uniformly from GOIDi ,
we introduce an adversarial training procedure called “goal
GAN”, which is a modification of the procedure used for
training Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). The modification allows us to train
the generative model both with positive examples from the
distribution we want to approximate and negative examples
sampled from a distribution that does not share support with
the desired one. This improves the accuracy of the generative model despite being trained with few positive samples.
Our choice of GANs for goal generation is motivated both
from this training from negative examples, as well as their
ability to generate very high dimensional samples such as
images (Goodfellow et al., 2014) which is important for scaling up our approach to goal generation in high-dimensional
goal spaces. Other generative models like Stochastic Neural Networks (Tang & Salakhutdinov, 2013) don’t accept
negative examples, and don’t scale to higher dimensions.

Algorithm 1 Generative Goal Learning

We use a “goal generator” neural network G(z) to generate
goals g from a noise vector z. We train G(z) to uniformly
output goals in GOIDi using a second “goal discriminator”
network D(g). The latter is trained to distinguish goals
that are in GOIDi from goals that are not in GOIDi . We
optimize our G(z) and D(g) in a manner similar to that of
the Least-Squares GAN (LSGAN) (Mao et al., 2017), which
we modify by introducing the binary label yg allowing us to
train from “negative examples” when yg = 0:
h
minV (D) = Eg∼pdata (g) yg (D(g) − b)2 +
D
i
(1 − yg )(D(g) − a)2 + Ez∼pz (z) [(D(G(z)) − a)2 ]
minV (G) = Ez∼pz (z) [D(G(z)) − c)2 ]
G

(5)

Input: Policy π0
Output: Policy πN
(G, D) ← initialize GAN()
goalsold ← ∅
for i ← 1 to N do
z ← sample noise(pz (·))
goals ← G(z) ∪ sample(goalsold )
πi ← update policy(goals, πi−1 )
returns ← evaluate policy(goals, πi )
labels ← label goals(returns)
(G, D) ← train GAN(goals, labels, G, D)
goalsold ← update replay(goals)
end for
Our full algorithm for training a policy π(at | st , g) to maximize the coverage objective in Eq. (3) is shown in Algorithm 1. At each iteration i, we generate a set of goals by
first using sample noise to obtain a noise vector z from
pz (·) and then passing this noise to the generator G(z). We
use these goals to train our policy using RL, with the reward
function given by Eq. (1) (update policy). Any RL algorithm can be used for training; in our case we use TRPO
with GAE (Schulman et al., 2015b). Our policy’s empirical
performance on these goals (evaluate policy) is used
to determine each goal’s label yg (label goals), as described in Section 4.1. Next, we use these labels to train our
goal generator and our goal discriminator (train GAN),
as described in Section 4.2. The generated goals from the
previous iteration are used to compute the Monte Carlo estimate of the expectations with respect to the distribution
pdata (g) in Eq. (5). By training on goals within GOIDi
produced by the goal generator, our method efficiently finds

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

a policy that optimizes the coverage objective. For details
on how we initialize the goal GAN (initialize GAN),
and how we use a replay buffer to prevent “catastrophic
forgetting” (update replay), see Appendix A.
The algorithm described above naturally creates a curriculum. The goal generator is updated along with the policy
to generate goals in GOIDi , for which our current policy
πi obtains an intermediate level of return. Thus such goals
are always at the appropriate level of difficulty. However,
the curriculum occurs as a by-product via our optimization,
without requiring any prior knowledge of the environment
or the tasks that the agent must perform.

(a) Free Ant Locomotion

(b) Maze Ant Locomotion

(c) Point-mass 3D

(d) Multi-path point-mass

5. Experimental Results
In this section we provide the experimental results to answer
the following questions:
• Does our automatic curriculum yield faster maximization of the coverage objective?
• Does our Goal GAN dynamically shift to sample goals
of the appropriate difficulty (i.e. in GOIDi )?
• Can our Goal GAN track complex multimodal goal
distributions GOIDi ?
• Does it scale to higher-dimensional goal-spaces with a
low-dimensional space of feasible goals?
To answer the first two questions, we demonstrate our
method in two challenging robotic locomotion tasks, where
the goals are the (x, y) position of the Center of Mass (CoM)
of a dynamically complex quadruped agent. In the first experiment the agent has no constraints (see Fig. 1a) and in the
second one the agent is inside a U-maze (see Fig. 1b). To answer the third question, we train a point-mass agent to reach
any point within a multi-path maze (see Fig. 1d). To answer
the final question, we study how our method scales with the
dimension of the goal-space in an environment where the
feasible region is kept of approximately constant volume in
an embedding space that grows in dimension (see Fig. 1c for
the 3D case). We compare our Goal GAN method against
four baselines. Uniform Sampling is a method that does not
use a curriculum at all, training at every iteration on goals
uniformly sampled from the goal-space. To demonstrate
that a straight-forward distance reward can be prone to local
minima, Uniform Sampling with L2 loss samples goals in
the same fashion as the first baseline, but instead of the indicator reward that our method uses, it receives the negative
L2 distance to the goal as a reward at every step. We have
also adapted two methods from the literature to our setting:
Asymmetric Self-play (Sukhbaatar et al., 2017) and SAGGRIAC (Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013b). Finally, we provide an
ablation and an oracle for our method to better understand
the importance of sampling goals of intermediate difficulty
g ∈ GOIDi . The ablation GAN fit all consists on train-

Figure 1. In 1a-1d, the red areas are goals reachable by the orange
agent. In 1c any point within the blue frame is a feasible goal
(purple balls) and the rest are unfeasible (black triangles).

ing the GAN not only on the goals g ∈ GOIDi but rather
on every goal attempted in the previous iteration. Given
the noise injected at the output of the GAN this generates
a gradually expanding set of goals - similar to any handdesigned curriculum. The oracle consists in sampling goals
uniformly from the feasible state-space, but only keeping
them if they satisfy the criterion in Eq. (4) defining GOIDi .
This Rejection Sampling method is orders of magnitude
more expensive in terms of labeling, but it serves to estimate
an upper-bound for our method in terms of performance.
5.1. Ant Locomotion
We test our method in two challenging environments of a
complex robotic agent navigating either a free space (Free
Ant, Fig. 1a) or a U-shaped maze (Maze Ant, Fig. 1b). Duan
et al. (2016) describe the task of trying to reach the other
end of the U-turn, and they show that standard RL methods
are unable to solve it. We further extend the task to ask to
be able to reach any given point within the maze, or within
the [−5, 5]2 square for Free Ant. The reward is still a sparse
indicator function being 1 only when the (x, y) CoM of the
Ant is within  = 0.5 of the goal. Therefore the goal space
is 2 dimensional, the state-space is 41 dimensional, and the
action space is 8 dimensional (see Appendix B.1).
We first explore whether, by training on goals that are generated by our Goal GAN, we are able to improve our policy’s
training efficiency, compared to the baselines described
above. In Figs. 2a-Fig. 2b we see that our method leads to
faster training compared to the baselines. The Uniform Sampling baseline does very poorly because too many samples

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

(a) Free Ant - Baselines

(b) Maze Ant - Baselines

(c) Free Ant - Variants
(d) Maze Ant - Variants
Figure 2. Learning curves comparing the training efficiency of our Goal GAN method and different baselines (first row) and variants
(second row), for the Free Ant (left column) and the Maze Ant (right column). The y-axis indicates the average return over all feasible
goals. The x-axis shows the number of times that new goals have been sampled. All plots average over 10 random seeds.

are wasted attempting to train on goals that are infeasible
or not reachable by the current policy - hence not receiving
any learning signal. If an L2 loss is added to try to guide
the learning, the agent falls into a poor local optima of not
moving to avoid further negative rewards. The two other
baselines that we compare against perform better, but still
do not surpass the performance of our method. In particular,
Asymmetric Self-play needs to train the goal-generating
policy (Alice) at every outer iteration, with an amount of
rollouts equivalent to the ones used to train the goal-reaching
policy. This additional burden is not represented in the plots,
being therefore at least half as sample-efficient as the plots
indicate. SAGG-RIAC maintains an ever-growing partition
of the goal-space that becomes more and more biased towards areas that already have more sub-regions, leading to
reduced exploration and slowing down the expansion of the
policy’s capabilities. Details of our adaptation of these two
methods to our problem, as well as further study of their
failure cases, is provided in the Appendices F.1 and F.2.
To better understand the efficiency of our method, we analyze the goals generated by our automatic curriculum. In
these Ant navigation experiments, the goal space is two
dimensional, allowing us to study the shift in the probability distribution generated by the Goal GAN (Fig. 3 for
the Maze Ant) along with the improvement of the policy

coverage (Fig. 4 for the Maze Ant). We have indicated the
difficulty of reaching the generated goals in Fig. 3. It can be
observed in these figures that the location of the generated
goals shifts to different parts of the maze, concentrating on
the area where the current policy is receiving some learning signal but needs more improvement. The percentage
of generated goals that are at the appropriate level of difficulty (in GOIDi ) stays around 20% even as the policy
improves. The goals in these figures include a mix of newly
generated goals from the Goal GAN as well as goals from
previous iterations that we use to prevent our policy from
“forgetting” (Appendix A.1). Overall it is clear that our Goal
GAN dynamically shift to sample goals of the appropriate
difficulty. See Appendix D and Fig. 9-10 therein for the
analogous analysis of Free Ant, where we observe that Goal
GAN produces a growing ring of goals around the origin.
It is interesting to analyze the importance of generating goals
in GOIDi for efficient learning. This is done in Figs. 2c-2d,
where we first show an ablation of our method GAN fit all,
that disregards the labels. This method performs worse than
ours, because the expansion of the goals is not related to
the current performance of the policy. Finally, we study the
Rejection Sampling oracle. As explained in Section 4.1, we
wish to sample from the set of goals GOIDi , which we approximate by fitting a Goal GAN to the distribution of good

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

(a) Iteration 5
(b) Iteration 90
(c) Iterartion 350
Figure 3. Goals that, at iterations i, our algorithm trains on - 200 sampled from Goal GAN, 100 from replay. Green goals satisfy R̄g (πi ) ≥
Rmax . Blue ones have appropriate difficulty for the current policy Rmin ≤ R̄g (πi ) ≤ Rmax . The red ones have Rmin ≥ R̄g (πi ).

(c) Itr 350: Coverage=0.71
(a) Itr 5: Coverage=0.20
(b) Itr 90: Coverage=0.48
Figure 4. Visualization of the policy performance (same policy training as in Fig. 3). For illustration purposes, each grid cell is colored
according to the expected return achieved when fixing its center as goal: Red indicates 100% success; blue indicates 0% success.

goals observed in the previous policy optimization step. We
evaluate now how much this approximation affects learning
by comparing the learning performance of our Goal GAN to
a policy trained on goals sampled uniformly from GOIDi
by using rejection sampling. This method is orders of magnitude more sample inefficient, but gives us an upper bound
on the performance of our method. Figs. 2c-2d demonstrate
that our performance is quite close to the performance of
this much less efficient baseline.
5.2. Multi-path point-mass maze
In this section we show that our Goal GAN method is efficient at tracking clearly multi-modal distributions of goals
g ∈ GOIDi . To this end, we introduce a new maze environment with multiple paths, as can be seen in Fig. 1d. To
keep the experiment simple we replace the Ant agent by a
point-mass, which actions are the velocity vector (2 dim).
As in the other experiments, our aim is to learn a policy that
can reach any feasible goal corresponding to -balls in state
space, like the one depicted in red.
Similar to the experiments in Figures 3 and 4, here we show
the goals that our algorithm generated to train the Mutlipath point-mass agent. Figures 5 and 6 show the results. It
can be observed that our method produces a multi-modal
distribution over goals, tracking all the areas where goals are
at the appropriate level of difficulty. Note that the samples
from the regularized replay buffer are responsible for the
trailing spread of “High Reward” goals and the Goal GAN
is responsible for the more concentrated nodes (see only
Goal GAN samples in Appendix Fig. 11). A clear benefit

of using our Goal GAN as a generative model is that no
prior knowledge about the distribution to fit is required (like
the number of modes). Finally, having several possible
paths to reach a specific goal does not hinder the learning of
our algorithm that consistently reaches full coverage in this
problem (see Appendix Fig. 12).
5.3. N-dimensional Point Mass
In many real-world RL problems, the set of feasible states
is a lower-dimensional subset of the full state space, defined
by the constraints of the environment. For example, the
kinematic constraints of a robot limit the set of feasible
states that the robot can reach. In this section we use an
N-dimensional Point Mass to demonstrate the performance
of our method as the embedding dimension increases.
In this experiments, the full state-space of the N dimensional Point Mass is the hypercube [−5, 5]N . However, the Point Mass can only move within a small subset
of this state space. In the two-dimensional case, the set
of feasible states corresponds to the [−5, 5] × [−1, 1] rectangle, making up 20% of the full space. For N > 2, the
feasible space is the Cartesian product of this 2D strip with
[−, ]N −2 , where  = 0.3. In this higher-dimensional environment, our agent
receives a reward of 1 when it moves
√
within N = 0.3 √N2 of the goal state, to account for the
increase in average L2 distance between points in higher
dimensions. The fraction of the volume of the feasible space
decreases as N increases (e.g. 0.00023:1 for N = 6).
We compare the performance of our method to the baselines in Fig. 7. The uniform sampling baseline has poor

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

(a) Iteration 1

(b) Iteration 10

(c) Iteration 30

(d) Iteration 100

Figure 5. Goals that, at iterations i, our algorithm trains on - 200 sampled from Goal GAN, 100 from replay. Green goals satisfy R̄g (πi ) ≥
Rmax . Blue ones have appropriate difficulty for the current policy Rmin ≤ R̄g (πi ) ≤ Rmax . The red ones have Rmin ≥ R̄g (πi ).

(a) Itr 1: Coverage=0.014 (b) Itr 10: Coverage=0.53 (c) Itr 30: Coverage=0.78 (d) Itr 100: Coverage=0.98
Figure 6. Visualization of the policy performance (same policy training as in Fig. 5). For illustration purposes, each grid cell is colored
according to the expected return achieved when fixing its center as goal: Red indicates 100% success; blue indicates 0% success.

formance, which is expected in this task where the optimal
policy is just to go in a straight line towards the goal. Even
without this prior knowledge, the Goal GAN discovers the
feasible subset of the goal space.

6. Conclusions and Future Work

Figure 7. Final goal coverage obtained after 200 outer iterations
on the N-dim point mass environment. All plots average over 5
random seeds.

performance as the number of dimensions increases because the fraction of feasible states within the full state
space decreases as the dimension increases. Thus, sampling
uniformly results in sampling an increasing percentage of
unfeasible goals, leading to poor learning signal. In contrast,
the performance of our method does not decay as much as
the state space dimension increases, because our Goal GAN
always generates goals within the feasible portion of the
state space. The GAN fit all variation of our method suffers
from the increase in dimension because it is not encouraged
to track the narrow feasible region. Finally, the oracle and
the baseline with an L2 distance reward have perfect per-

We propose a new paradigm in RL where the objective is to
train a single policy to succeed on a variety of goals, under
sparse rewards. To solve this problem we develop a method
for automatic curriculum generation that dynamically adapts
to the current performance of the agent. The curriculum is
obtained without any prior knowledge of the environment or
of the tasks being performed. We use generative adversarial
training to automatically generate goals for our policy that
are always at the appropriate level of difficulty (i.e. not too
hard and not too easy). In the future we want to combine our
goal-proposing strategy with recent multi-goal approaches
like HER (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) that could greatly
benefit from better ways to select the next goal to train on.
Another promising line of research is to build hierarchy on
top of the multi-task policy that we obtain with our method
by training a higher-level policy that outputs the goal for the
lower level multi-task policy (Heess et al., 2016; Florensa
et al., 2017a). The hierarchy could also be introduced by
replacing our current feed-forward neural network policy
by an architecture that learns to build implicit plans (Mnih
et al., 2016; Tamar et al., 2016), or by leveraging expert
demonstrations to extract sub-goals (Zheng et al., 2016),
although none of these approaches tackles yet the multi-task
learning problem formulated in this work.

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

7. Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by Berkeley Deep Drive,
ONR PECASE N000141612723, Darpa FunLoL. Carlos
Florensa was also supported by a La Caixa Fellowship.

References
Achiam, J. and Sastry, S. Surprise-based intrinsic motivation for deep reinforcement learning. In 2016 Deep
Reinforcement Learning Workshop at NIPS, 2016.
Andrychowicz, M., Wolski, F., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Fong,
R., Welinder, P., McGrew, B., Tobin, J., Abbeel, P., and
Zaremba, W. Hindsight experience replay. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., and Bottou, L. Wasserstein
GAN. In Stat, 2017.
Baldassarre, G. and Mirolli, M. Temporal-difference
competence-based intrinsic motivation (td-cb-im): A
mechanism that uses the td-error as an intrinsic reinforcement for deciding which skill to learn when. Intrinsically
Motivated Learning in Natural and Artificial Systems, pp.
255–276, 2012.
Baranes, A. and Oudeyer, P.-Y. Intrinsically motivated goal
exploration for active motor learning in robots: A case
study. In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2010
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pp. 1766–1773.
IEEE, 2010.
Baranes, A. and Oudeyer, P.-Y. Active learning of inverse
models with intrinsically motivated goal exploration in
robots. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61(1):49–73,
2013a.

Deisenroth, M. P., Englert, P., Peters, J., and Fox, D. Multitask policy search for robotics. In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2014 IEEE International Conference on, pp.
3876–3881. IEEE, 2014.
Duan, Y., Chen, X., Houthooft, R., Schulman, J., and
Abbeel, P. Benchmarking deep reinforcement learning for
continuous control. International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2016.
Fabisch, A. and Metzen, J. H. Active contextual policy
search. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):
3371–3399, 2014.
Florensa, C., Duan, Y., and Abbeel, P. Stochastic neural
networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In International Conference in Learning Representations, 2017a.
Florensa, C., Held, D., Wulfmeier, M., and Abbeel, P. Reverse curriculum generation for reinforcement learning.
Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2017b.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B.,
Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y.
Generative adversarial networks. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.
Graves, A., Bellemare, M. G., Menick, J., Munos, R., and
Kavukcuoglu, K. Automated Curriculum Learning for
Neural Networks. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1704.03003,
2017.
Guo, X., Singh, S., Lewis, R., and Lee, H. Deep learning
for reward design to improve monte carlo tree search
in atari games. Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence (UAI), 2016.

Baranes, A. and Oudeyer, P.-Y. Active learning of inverse
models with intrinsically motivated goal exploration in
robots. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61(1), 2013b.

Heess, N., Wayne, G., Tassa, Y., Lillicrap, T., Riedmiller,
M., and Silver, D. Learning and transfer of modulated
locomotor controllers. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1610.05182,
2016.

Bellemare, M. G., Srinivasan, S., Ostrovski, G., Schaul,
T., Saxton, D., and Munos, R. Unifying count-based
exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2016.

Houthooft, R., Chen, X., Duan, Y., Schulman, J., De Turck,
F., and Abbeel, P. Variational information maximizing
exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2016.

Bengio, S., Vinyals, O., Jaitly, N., and Shazeer, N. Scheduled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.

Karpathy, A. and Van De Panne, M. Curriculum learning
for motor skills. In Canadian Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pp. 325–330. Springer, 2012.

Bengio, Y., Louradour, J., Collobert, R., and Weston, J.
Curriculum learning. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 41–48. ACM, 2009.
Deisenroth, M. P., Neumann, G., Peters, J., et al. A survey
on policy search for robotics. Foundations and Trends in
Robotics, 2(1–2):1–142, 2013.

Konidaris, G., Kuindersma, S., Grupen, R. A., and Barto,
A. G. Autonomous skill acquisition on a mobile manipulator. In AAAI, 2011.
Kupcsik, A. G., Deisenroth, M. P., Peters, J., Neumann, G.,
and Others. Data-efficient generalization of robot skills
with contextual policy search. In AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1401–1407, 2013.

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

Levine, S., Finn, C., Darrell, T., and Abbeel, P. End-to-end
training of deep visuomotor policies. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 17(39):1–40, 2016.

Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et al. Mastering the
game of go with deep neural networks and tree search.
Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.

Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T.,
Tassa, Y., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous control
with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint, arXiv:
1509.02971, 2015.

Sukhbaatar, S., Kostrikov, I., Szlam, A., and Fergus, R.
Intrinsic Motivation and Automatic Curricula via Asymmetric Self-Play. arXiv preprint, arXiv: 1703.05407,
2017.

Mao, X., Li, Q., Xie, H., Lau, R. Y., Wang, Z., and Smolley,
S. P. On the effectiveness of least squares generative
adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06391,
2017.

Tamar, A., Wu, Y., Thomas, G., Levine, S., and Abbeel, P.
Value iteration networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2154–2162, 2016.

Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness,
J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):
529–533, 2015.
Mnih, V., Agapiou, J., Osindero, S., Graves, A., Vinyals, O.,
Kavukcuoglu, K., et al. Strategic attentive writer for learning macro-actions. ArXiv preprint, ArXiv:1606.04695,
2016.
Ranchod, P., Rosman, B., and Konidaris, G. Nonparametric
bayesian reward segmentation for skill discovery using
inverse reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 471–477.
IEEE, 2015.
Schaul, T., Horgan, D., Gregor, K., and Silver, D. Universal value function approximators. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1312–1320, 2015.
Schmidhuber, J. Curious model-building control systems.
In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks,
pp. 1458–1463. IEEE, 1991.
Schmidhuber, J. Formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic motivation (1990–2010). IEEE Transactions on
Autonomous Mental Development, 2(3):230–247, 2010.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., and Moritz,
P. Trust region policy optimization. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1889–1897, 2015a.
Schulman, J., Moritz, P., Levine, S., Jordan, M., and Abbeel,
P. High-Dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In International Conference
on Learning Representation, 2015b.
Sharma, S. and Ravindran, B. Online Multi-Task Learning Using Biased Sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1702.06053, 2017.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L.,
Van Den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I.,

Tang, H., Houthooft, R., Foote, D., Stooke, A., Chen, X.,
Duan, Y., Schulman, J., Turck, F. D., and Abbeel, P.
#exploration: A study of count-based exploration for
deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1611.04717,
2016.
Tang, Y. and Salakhutdinov, R. Learning Stochastic Feedforward Neural Networks. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2:530–538, 2013.
Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012.
Vigorito, C. M. and Barto, A. G. Intrinsically motivated hierarchical skill learning in structured environments. IEEE
Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2(2):
132–143, 2010.
Zaremba, W. and Sutskever, I. Learning to execute. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1410.4615, 2014.
Zheng, S., Yue, Y., and Hobbs, J. Generating long-term trajectories using deep hierarchical networks. In Lee, D. D.,
Sugiyama, M., Luxburg, U. V., Guyon, I., and Garnett,
R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 29. 2016.

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

A. Implementation details
A.1. Replay buffer
In addition to training our policy on the goals that were
generated in the current iteration, we also save a list (“regularized replay buffer”) of goals that were generated during
previous iterations (update replay). These goals are
also used to train our policy, so that our policy does not
forget how to achieve goals that it has previously learned.
When we generate goals for our policy to train on, we sample two thirds of the goals from the Goal GAN and we
sample the one third of the goals uniformly from the replay
buffer. To prevent the replay buffer from concentrating in a
small portion of goal space, we only insert new goals that
are further away than  from the goals already in the buffer,
where we chose the goal-space metric and  to be the same
as the ones introduced in Section 3.1.
A.2. Goal GAN Initialization
In order to begin our training procedure, we need to initialize our goal generator to produce an initial set of goals
(initialize GAN). If we initialize the goal generator
randomly (or if we initialize it to sample uniformly from the
goal space), it is likely that, for most (or all) of the sampled
goals, our initial policy would receives no reward due to the
sparsity of the reward function. Thus we might have that all
of our initial goals g have R̄g (π0 ) < Rmin , leading to very
slow training.
To avoid this problem, we initialize our goal generator to
output a set of goals that our initial policy is likely to be
able to achieve with R̄g (πi ) ≥ Rmin . To accomplish this,
we run our initial policy π0 (at | st , g) with goals sampled
uniformly from the goal space. We then observe the set
of states S v that are visited by our initial policy. These
are states that can be easily achieved with the initial policy,
π0 , so the goals corresponding to such states will likely
be contained within S0I . We then train the goal generator
to produce goals that match the state-visitation distribution
pv (g), defined as the uniform distribution over the set f (S v ).
We can achieve this through traditional GAN training, with
pdata (g) = pv (g). This initialization of the generator allows
us to bootstrap the Goal GAN training process, and our
policy is able to quickly improve its performance.

B. Experimental details
B.1. Ant specifications
The ant is a quadruped with 8 actuated joints, 2 for each
leg. The environment is implemented in Mujoco (Todorov
et al., 2012). Besides the coordinates of the center of mass,
the joint angles and joint velocities are also included in the
observation of the agent. The high degrees of freedom make

navigation a quite complex task requiring motor coordination. More details can be found in Duan et al. (2016), and
the only difference is that in our goal-oriented version of
the Ant we append the observation with the goal, the vector
from the CoM to the goal and the distance to the goal. For
the Free Ant experiments the objective is to reach any point
in the square [−5m, 5m]2 on command. The maximum
time-steps given to reach the current goal are 500.
B.2. Ant Maze Environment
The agent is constrained to move within the maze environment, which has dimensions of 6m x 6m. The full statespace has an area of size 10 m x 10 m, within which the
maze is centered. To compute the coverage objective, goals
are sampled from within the maze according to a uniform
grid on the maze interior. The maximum time-steps given
to reach the current goal are 500.
B.3. Point-mass specifications
For the N-dim point mass of Section 5.3, in each episode
(rollout) the point-mass has 400 timesteps to reach the goal,
where each timestep is 0.02 seconds. The agent can accelerate in up to a rate of 5 m/s2 in each dimension (N = 2
for the maze). The observations of the agent are 2N dimensional, including position and velocity of the point-mass.
B.4. Goal GAN design and training
After the generator generates goals, we add noise to each
dimension of the goal sampled from a normal distribution
with zero mean and unit variance. At each step of the algorithm, we train the policy for 5 iterations, each of which
consists of 100 episodes. After 5 policy iterations, we then
train the GAN for 200 iterations, each of which consists
of 1 iteration of training the discriminator and 1 iteration
of training the generator. The generator receives as input 4
dimensional noise sampled from the standard normal distribution. The goal generator consists of two hidden layers
with 128 nodes, and the goal discriminator consists of two
hidden layers with 256 nodes, with relu nonlinearities.
B.5. Policy and optimization
The policy is defined by a neural network which receives as
input the goal appended to the agent observations described
above. The inputs are sent to two hidden layers of size 32
with tanh nonlinearities. The final hidden layer is followed
by a linear N -dimensional output, corresponding to accelerations in the N dimensions. For policy optimization, we use
a discount factor of 0.998 and a GAE lambda of 0.995. The
policy is trained with TRPO with Generalized Advantage
Estimation implemented in rllab (Schulman et al., 2015a;b;
Duan et al., 2016). Every ”update policy” consists of 5

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

iterations of this algorithm.

C. Study of GoalGAN goals
To label a given goal (Section 4.1), we could empirically
estimate the expected return for this goal R̄g (πi ) by performing rollouts of our current
n policy πi . The label for this
o
goal is then set to yg = 1 Rmin ≤ R̄g (πi ) ≤ Rmax .
Nevertheless, having to execute additional rollouts just for
labeling is not sample efficient. Therefore, we instead use
the rollouts that were used for the most recent policy update.
This is an approximation as the rollouts where performed
under πi−1 , but as we show in Figs. 8a-8b, this small “delay” does not affect learning significantly. Indeed, using the
true label (estimated with three new rollouts from πi ) yields
the Goal GAN true label curves that are only slightly better
than what our method does. Furthermore, no matter what
labeling technique is used, the success rate of most goals is
computed as an average of at most four attempts. Therefore,
the statement Rmin ≤ R̄g (πi ) will be unchanged for any
value of Rmin ∈ (0, 0.25). Same for R̄g (πi ) ≤ Rmax and
Rmax ∈ (0.75, 1). This implies that the labels estimates
(and hence our automatic curriculum generation algorithm)
is almost invariant for any value of the hypermparameters
Rmin and Rmax in these ranges.
In the same plots we also study another criteria to choose
the goals to train on that has been previously used in the
literature: learning progress (Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013b;
Graves et al., 2017). Given that we work in a continuous
goal-space, estimating the learning progress of a single goal
requires estimating the performance of the policy on that
goal before the policy update and after the policy update
(potentially being able to replace one of these estimations
with the rollouts from the policy optimization, but not both).
Therefore the method does require more samples, but we
deemed interesting to compare how well the metrics allow
to automatically build a curriculum. We see in the Figs. 8a8b that the two metrics yield a very similar learning, at least
in the case of Ant navigation tasks with sparse rewards.

D. Goal Generation for Free Ant
Similar to the experiments in Figures 3 and 4, here we show
the goals that were generated for the Free Ant experiment in
which a robotic quadruped must learn to move to all points
in free space. Figures 9 and 10 show the results. As shown,
our method produces a growing circle around the origin;
as the policy learns to move the ant to nearby points, the
generator learns to generate goals at increasingly distant
positions.

(a) Free Ant - Variants

(b) Maze Ant - Variants
Figure 8. Learning curves comparing the training efficiency of our
method and different variants. All plots are an average over 10
random seeds.

E. Learning for Multi-path point-mass
To clearly observe that our GoalGAN approach is capable of
fitting multimodal distributions, we have plotted in Fig. 11
only the samples coming from the GoalGAN (i.e. no samples from the replay buffer). Also, in this environment there
are several ways of reaching every part of the maze. This is
not a problem for our algorithm, as can be seen in the full
learning curves in Fig.12, where we see that all runs of the
algorithm reliably reaches full coverage of the multi-path
maze.

F. Comparisons with other methods
F.1. Asymmetric self-play (Sukhbaatar et al., 2017)
Although not specifically designed for the problem presented in this paper, it is straight forward to apply the method
proposed by Sukhbaatar et al. (2017) to our problem. An
interesting study of its limitations in a similar setting can be
found in (Florensa et al., 2017b).

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

(a) Iteration 10

(b) Iteration 100

(c) Iterartion 300

Figure 9. Goals that our algorithm trains on (200 sampled from the
Goal GAN, 100 from the replay). “High rewards” (green) are goals
with R̄g (πi ) ≥ Rmax ; GOIDi (blue) have appropriate difficulty
for the current policy Rmin ≤ R̄g (πi ) ≤ Rmax . The red ones
have Rmin ≥ R̄g (πi )

Figure 11. Iteration
10 Goal GAN
samples (Fig. 5b
without
replay
samples)

Figure 12. Learning curves of our algorithm on Multi-path Point-mass Maze, consistently achieving full coverage

Algorithm 2 Generative Goal with Sagg-RIAC

(c) Iteration 300:
(a) Iteration 10:
(b) Iteration 100:
Coverage = 0.86
Coverage = 0.037
Coverage = 0.4
Figure 10. Visualization of the policy performance for different
parts of the state space (same policy training as in Fig. 9). For
illustration purposes, the feasible state-space is divided into a
grid, and a goal location is selected from the center of each grid
cell. Each grid cell is colored according to the expected return
achieved on this goal: Red indicates 100% success; blue indicates
0% success.

F.2. SAGG-RIAC (Baranes & Oudeyer, 2013b)
In our implementation of this method, we use TRPO as
the “Low-Level Goal-Directed Exploration with Evolving
Context”. We therefore implement the method as batch: at
every iteration, we sample Nnew new goals {yi }i=0...Nnew ,
then we collect rollouts of tmax steps trying to reach them,
and perform the optimization of the parameters using all
the collected data. The detailed algorithm is given in the
following pseudo-code.
UpdateRegions(R, yf , Γyf ) is exactly the Algorithm 2 described in the original paper, and Self-generate is the ”Active Goal Self-Generation (high-level)” also described in
the paper (Section 2.4.4 and Algorithm 1), but it’s repeated
Nnew times to produce a batch of Nnew goals jointly. As
for the competence Γyg , we use the same formula as in
their section 2.4.1 (use highest competence if reached close
enough to the goal) and C(yg , yf ) is computed with their
equation (7). The collect rollout function resets the
state s0 = sreset and then applies actions following the
goal-conditioned policy πθ (·, yg ) until it reaches the goal or
the maximum number of steps tmax has been taken. The
final state, transformed in goal space, yf is returned.
As hyperparameters, we have used the recommended ones in
the paper, when available: p1 = 0.7, p2 = 0.2, p3 = 0.1.

Hyperparameters: window size ζ, tolerance threshold
max , competence threshold C , maximum time horizon
tmax , number of new goals Nnew , maximum number of
goals gmax , mode proportions (p1 , p2 , p3 )
Input: Policy πθ0 (sstart , yg ), goal bounds BY , reset
position srest
Output:
 Policy πθN (sstart , yg )
R ← (R0 , ΓR0 ) where R0 = Region(BY ), ΓR0 = 0
for i ← 1 to N do
goals ← Self-generate Nnew goals: {yj }j=0...Nnew
paths = [ ]
while number steps in(paths) < batch size do
Reset s0 ← srest
yg ← Uniform(goals)
Γyg ,
path
←
yf ,
collect rollout(πθi (·, yg ), sreset )
paths.append(path)
UpdateRegions(R, yf , 0)
UpdateRegions(R, yg , Γyg )
end while
πθi+1 ← train πθi with TRPO on collected paths
end for

For the rest, the best performance in an hyperparameter
sweep yields: ζ = 100, gmax = 100. The noise for mode(3)
is chosen to be Gaussian with variance 0.1, the same as the
tolerance threshold max and the competence threshold C .
As other details, in our tasks there are no constraints to
penalize for, so ρ = ∅. Also, there are no sub-goals. The
reset value r is 1 as we reset to sstart after every reaching
attempt. The number of explorative movements q ∈ N has
a less clear equivalence as we use a policy gradient update
with a stochastic policy πθ instead of a SSA-type algorithm.

Automatic Goal Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents

(a) Iteration 2

(b) Iteration 20

(c) Iterartion 300

Figure 13. Goals sampled by SAGG-RIAC (same policy training as in Fig. 14). “High rewards” (in green) are goals with R̄g (πi ) ≥ Rmax ;
GOIDi (in blue) are those with the appropriate level of difficulty for the current policy (Rmin ≤ R̄g (πi ) ≤ Rmax ). The red ones have
Rmin ≥ R̄g (πi )

(c) Iteration 300:
(a) Iteration 2:
(b) Iteration 100:
Num. of Regions = 15420
Num. of Regions = 54
Num. of Regions = 1442
Figure 14. Visualization of the regions generated by the SAGG-RIAC algorithm

