arXiv:2205.06148v1 [physics.optics] 12 May 2022

Spatially resolved spectroscopy of alkali metal
vapour diffusing inside hollow-core photonic crystal
fibres
Daniel R Häupl1,2 , Daniel Weller3 , Robert Löw3 and
Nicolas Y Joly1,2
1 University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Staudtstraße 7/B2, 91058 Erlangen, Germany

2 Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light, Staudtstraße 2, 91058 Erlangen,

Germany
3 5th Physical Institute, University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, 70569
Stuttgart, Germany
E-mail: daniel.haeupl@mpl.mpg.de

Abstract. We present a new type of compact and all-glass based vapour cell
integrating hollow-core photonic crystal fibres. The absence of metals, as in a
traditional vacuum chamber and the much more compact geometry allows for
fast and homogeneous heating. As a consequence we can fill the fibres on much
faster timescales, ranging from minutes to hours. Additionally the all-glass design
ensures optical access along the fibre. This allows live monitoring of the diffusion
of rubidium atoms inside the hollow-core by measuring the frequency-dependent
fluorescence from the atoms. The atomic density is numerically retrieved using a
5-level system of Bloch-equations.

Spatially resolved spectroscopy of alkali metal vapour diffusing inside hollow-core photonic crystal fibres2
1. Introduction
Hot atomic vapours are an active field of research and have great potential in the fields
of quantum optics [1, 2] quantum communication [3, 4] or metrology [5, 6]. Optimal
atom-light coupling in a vapour cell is limited by the diffraction limit of Gaussian
beams. This can be overcome by confining light and atoms inside a hollow-core fibre.
This led to many applications from nonlinear optics in noble gases [7], to chemistry [8],
and three-photons spectroscopy of caesium vapour inside pcfs [9]. Although previous
works [9–11] showed the feasibility of filling hc-pcfs with hot vapours, the experimental
setup was not optimal. The fibres were placed inside a conventional steel vacuum
chamber filled with caesium. On the one hand, the large size of the steel chamber
makes a homogeneous heating of the system not only technically challenging but prone
to the creation of cold spots, reducing the vapour density at the position of the fibre.
With this it takes accordingly longer until the entire fibre is in equilibrium with the
background pressure and homogeneously filled. Uneven filling along the fibre length
additionally creates severe static electric fields, troublesome for experiments with e.g.
Rydberg atoms [12]. In this paper we present a new type of vapour cell that is entirely
made out of glass. This includes a new way to mount the fibre inside the cell. These
cells are not much larger than the fibre itself and offer an extended stem. Both regions
are encapsuled by an appropriate two-zone oven, preventing condensation in the main
part by keeping the stem slightly cooler. Moreover, since our design allows full optical
access from the side, we can monitor the evolution of the atomic density distribution
along the whole fibre length through the measurement of radially emitted fluorescence.
From spatially resolved fluorescence we can deduce on what timescale the atoms diffuse
into the fibre. Finally we modelled the frequency-dependent absorption of the light
propagating inside the hollow-core using a 5-level system to obtain a quantitative
understanding of the diffusion process. At first, we present the concept of the gas-cell
and how to hold the fibre properly. To study the dynamics of the filling process, we
start in an equilibrium situation at a certain temperature and then suddenly raise or
drop T and monitor how long it takes to undergo thermalisation.
2. Experimental setup
Optical setup. Our setup is depicted in Fig. 1a. The pump comes from a linearly
polarised Toptica DL-pro operated at 780 nm. The pump beam is split into two
independent paths, both being sent to the gas-cell. The power of each beam line is
controlled by a combination of half waveplate and polarisation beam-splitter cube. We
use a second half waveplate to adjust the polarisation state at the entrance of the cell.
One beam is coupled to a 60 µm core diameter Kagomé fibre using a lens with 100 mm
focal distance. A scanning electron micrograph of the end face of the fibre is shown
in Fig. 1b. The fibre is 7.5 cm long. The second beam propagates freely through the
gas-cell. At the output of the cell we monitor the transmitted power of the two beams
with two photodiodes. Optical bandpass filters are inserted to prevent ambient light
from perturbing the detected signal. The glass cell consist of a  × L = 30 × 80 mm2
tube made of borosilicate where the optical fibre is placed. To ensure that the fibre is
kept straight, we shrunk a 5 mm thick borosilicate tube around the bare optical fibre.
The fibre-in-tube is not only more sturdy and can be hold in place with two glass
supports, but due to the large thickness we are able to distinguish between fluorescence
emitted in the hollow-core fibre and the background outside of it. This background

Spatially resolved spectroscopy of alkali metal vapour diffusing inside hollow-core photonic crystal fibres3
light stems from leakage out of the fibre, non-perfect coupling and emitted fluorescence.
Such a design gives access from the side over the complete length of the fibre, allowing
side-scattering measurements. A secondary  × L = 5 × 45 mm2 tube is connected
at 90° to the main cell and acts as the reservoir. When the cell is sealed before its first
use, liquid alkali metal is poured into the reservoir. In the current case we filled our cell
with rubidium with its natural isotope distribution. The temperature of the reservoir
and of the main cell can be addressed independently. The temperature of the reservoir
is kept lower than that of the main cell. Therefore, not only is the atomic density
given by the stem temperature but no Rb atoms will stick to the walls of the main
cell. The diffusion of the rubidium atoms from the reservoir into the main cell is quite
fast given the small dimensions and a steady state is achieved almost instantaneously.
To accelerate the diffusion of the atoms into the fibre, we use elevated temperatures,
increasing the overall atomic density. In principle we could work up to 300° or even
above, but for technical reason we limit us to the range of 45 to 80°.

a)

BS
50:50

T

Rubidium

λ=780nm
T

HWP PBS HWP
f=100mm

b)

Kagomé HC-PCF
filter

c)
30 mm

100 μm

80 mm

Figure 1. (a) Sketch of the experimental setup. The input beam at 780 nm is
initially split equally by a 50:50 beam-splitter BS. Half-wave plates (HWP) and
polarisation beam splitter (PBS) ensure the control of the power and a second
HWP the input polarisation. One beam is free-space propagating through the cell
and the other is coupled into a 60 µm core diameter Kagomé hollow-core pcf shown
in (b). At the output of the vapour cell, the beams are separately focused onto
photodiodes, with frequency filters in front. (c) is the all-glass vapour cell. The
temperature of the reservoir and of the main cell can be addressed independently.

Filling the vapour cell and the fibre. Ensuring a constant atomic density inside the
fibre is of vital interest for experiments involving, e.g. Rydberg states. In order to
monitor the filling process, we constantly measure the spectra after our fibre and of
a free-space beam through the glass cell itself, while scanning the probe wavelength
through the complete D2 line of rubidium. We target the 85 Rb F = 2 line and model it
using a Maxwell-Bloch equation approach, including the hyperfine states but neglecting
the magnetic sublevels. In order to take into account the small beam size inside our
fibre, we include transit time broadening [13] in our 5-level-system (85 Rb; F = 2,3;
F0 = 1,2,3, Figure 2). The evolution of the density matrix is governed by the Lindblad
master equation [14]
ih̄

∂ρ
= [H, ρ] + ih̄LD (ρ),
∂t

(1)

Spatially resolved spectroscopy of alkali metal vapour diffusing inside hollow-core photonic crystal fibres4

F’ = 3
F’ = 2
F’ = 1

F=3
F=2
Figure 2. 5-level-system used for the retrieval of the atomic density distribution.

with H the Hamiltonian of the system, ρ the density matrix and LD (ρ) the Lindblad
operator. The measured spectrum corresponds to the steady state solution of equation
(1), which yields the excited state fraction of the system. The off-diagonal elements
lead to the complex valued electric susceptibility χ and thus the absorption coefficient.
To ensure absolute calibration of the frequency-axis, part of the pump beam is guided
through a Fabry-Perot interferometer. For intensities below the saturation intensity,
we cross-checked our model to the ElecSus open source software [15] for which length,
temperature, magnetic field, light polarization, etc. can be adjusted. Note that ElecSus
does not take power broadening into account, but it is implemented in our model. In
our case, we work above saturation intensity and have to include this in our simulations.
Beside the intensity, the temperature of the reservoir is the only fitting parameter,
which yields the atomic density via the perfect gas law.
Figure 3 shows the evolution of the atomic density of rubidium in the vapour cell
and inside the Kagomé fibre for different temperatures of the cell and of the reservoir.
At all times we make sure that the temperature of the reservoir remains lower than
that of the main cell. In the initial stage (Figure 3a) the vapour cell is heated from
room temperature to 80 °C and left there for 96 h. During that time, the reservoir
is left at ambient temperature and only heats up due to the conduction of the oven,
reaching 45 °C. As shown in Figure 3a, as the oven is switched on, the density of
atoms in the main cell rapidly increases (blue line). Surprisingly, the estimation of the
density of rubidium retrieved from the spectrum at the output of the fibre overshoots
the value that is expected for such a temperature of the reservoir. We reproducibly
observe this whenever we turn on the system. One possible reason being, that even
at room temperature rubidium metal diffused into the fibre and stuck to the core
wall. When we then increase the temperature, those atoms might desorb and after
roughly 5 h the system has relaxed. Afterwards the density inside the fibre increased
with a time constant of 45 h. In a second step – after 96 hours – we increased the
reservoir temperature to 65 °C, while keeping the cell temperature at 80 °C. As seen in
Figure 3b, the average density in the cell (blue line) follows almost instantaneously
the set temperature of the reservoir. In case of our Kagomé fibre (green line), we
also observe this rapid change, but the atomic density reached an equilibrium after
∼ 24 h, with a timescale of 9.4 h for the diffusion process. This should be compared to
the previous experiment using a 60 µm core diameter Kagomé fibre. At that time the

Spatially resolved spectroscopy of alkali metal vapour diffusing inside hollow-core photonic crystal fibres5

Figure 3. Evolution of the atomic density of rubidium in the vapour cell (blue)
and inside the Kagomé fibre (green) vs. the temperature of the cell (black) and
of the reservoir (red). The insets magnify the regions where the atomic densities
rapidly change due to a modification of the temperatures. The green arrow
indicates the apparent overshooting of the density inside the hollow-core when the
system is switched on.

filling process lasted > 20 days [16].
To even better understand the diffusion in/out of the fibre for an increase/decrease
of the gas pressure in the main cell, we additionally look at the radial fluorescence
along the fibre. In a simple picture, the atomic density should be proportional to the
emitted fluorescence. As a proof of principle, we decrease the temperature of the cell,
corresponding to a reduction of the atomic density in the surrounding glass cell and
causing a density gradient between the fibre and the cell. We chose a temperature
decrease, giving us more time for a careful study of the system dynamics. Specifically, we
decreased the reservoir temperature from 65 to 45 °C while keeping the cell temperature
at 80 °C and monitored the diffusion process over 100 h. While the rubidium diffuses
out of the fibre, we take a series of pictures using a 14-bit ccd camera mounted above
our glass cell. To obtain a full spectrum we scan the laser over the the D2 F = 2
transition of 85 Rb and image the glass cell every 17.5 MHz of laser detuning. The
input polarisation was chosen so that maximum intensity was recorded by the CCD
camera. The complete scan takes 25 s, which is well below the diffusion timescale
that we measured previously (Figure 3). Each image is transversally integrated within
the roi to obtain a one-dimensional intensity distribution along the propagation. By
stacking these 160 pictures for all recorded frequencies, we obtain a two-dimensional
map of the emitted fluorescence as a function of detuning and fibre position as shown
in Figure 4. The resolution of these maps is around 160 × 870 px2 (detuning × length),
depending on the acquisition speed of the camera. On Figure 4b and c the black lines
represent the raw experimental data for two specific frequencies and the blue lines our
model.
We extract the evolution of the density inside the fibre for a specific detuning ∆
of the pump using the Beer-Lambert law. This is done in an iterative way along the
whole length of the fibre, assuming an initial intensity I(z = 0) and an atomic density

Spatially resolved spectroscopy of alkali metal vapour diffusing inside hollow-core photonic crystal fibres6
η(z = 0). As the light propagates the intensity decreases according to
np
o
dI
4π
=
Im
1 + χ [η(z), I(z), ∆] I(z)
(2)
dz
λ
where the susceptibility χ depends on the atomic density η(z) and on the light intensity
I(z). As we lower the temperature of the reservoir, the density of atoms inside the
cell will decrease, yielding a symmetric diffusion of atoms out of both ends of the fibre.
For simplicity, we assume that the atomic density distribution follows

 

L
2
η(z) = (ηc − ηe ) · 1 − tanh σ · z −
+ ηe ,
(3)
2
with L the fibre length, ηe and ηc respectively the atomic density at both ends and
at the center of the fibre. σ is chosen so that η(0) = η(L) is within 1% of ηe . This
approximately corresponds to a factor of σ = L6 . The measured fluorescence (black

Figure 4. (a) Two-dimensional map of fluorescence emitted by rubidium atoms
inside a hc-pcf as a function of detuning and fibre position at 65 °C. Light is
entering the cell from the position ‘0’. Black indicates experimental data and
blue the best fit. The grey area marks the position of the fibre holders, which
were ignored for fitting. (b) and (c) illustrate the fluorescence along z along at
respectively 0 and 250 MHz indicated by the dotted lines. (d) and (e) show the
spectrum at the beginning (z = 0) and end (z = L) of the fibre.

lines in Figure 4b, c is directly linked with the atomic density and the excited state
fraction. Combining the steady state solution of (1) with the assumed distribution of
(3), we calculate ηe and ηc . As shown on Figure 4b and c the calculated fluorescence
curves (blue lines) along the fibre length agree very well with our experimental data.
Figure 4d and e show the fluorescence spectra at the beginning and the end of the
fibre at a given time t. As the diffusion process takes place, we record a series of these

Spatially resolved spectroscopy of alkali metal vapour diffusing inside hollow-core photonic crystal fibres7
maps which are processed the same way. Figure 5a shows the temporal evolution of
the atomic density at the end (ηe ) and in the center (ηc ) of the fibre. It is clear that
the atomic density at the edge rapidly decreases (green curve) following the change in
the cell. The change in the center (blue curve) is much slower, because the rubidium
atoms need to diffuse out of the fibre. Like the transmission measurement (Figure 3a),
the fluorescence measurement shows that the atomic density rapidly changes as soon as
the reservoir temperature is modified (Figure 5a). After this abrupt drop the evolution
of the atomic density is much slower, with timescales of τc = 36 h and τe = 45 h, when
fitting with a double exponential decay of the form
η(t) = ae−t/τ1 + be−t/τ2 + c.

(4)

Here τc respectively τe is the larger of the two lifetimes τ1 /τ2 , corresponding to the
slower diffusion timescale of the system.

Figure 5. Retrieved atomic densities at the center (blue) and edges (green) of a
60 µm Kagomé fibre when decreasing the reservoir temperature from 65 to 45 °C
while keeping a constant cell temperature of 80 °C. The grey curve is the relative
density change 2 (ηc −ηe )/(ηc +ηe ).

To conclude, we presented here an all-glass assembly integrating alkali vapours
with a hollow-core photonic crystal fibre. Its small dimensions and homogeneous
temperature permit a rapid modification of the atomic density in a controlled way.
Additionally, the all-glass design allows to perform easily accessible measurements from
the side. Measuring the fluorescence of the rubidium allows observing in real-time and
spatially resolved the diffusion of the atoms out of the fibre when changing the atomic
density inside the vapour cell. Both transmission and fluorescence measurements
confirm that the atomic density inside the fibre has reached an equilibrium only after
a few days. This drastically contrasts with previous experiments, where hollow-core
fibres were filled with hot alkali metal in bulky metal based vacuum chambers [12].
We believe that such a cell makes an attractive tool for atomic spectroscopy, Rydberg
physics and non-linear optics. Its small size makes this type of cells more transportable
and integration in an spectroscopy setup much easier. In a next step it would be
interesting to have an all fibre based setup to avoid free beam coupling to the fibre [17].

Spatially resolved spectroscopy of alkali metal vapour diffusing inside hollow-core photonic crystal fibres8
Acknowledgements
This project is supported by the DFG (JO 1090/4-1, LO 1657/6-1 & RU 1426/1-1)
as part of the SPP 1929 ”Giant Interactions in Rydberg Systems (GiRyd)”. We also
thank SAOT for financial support.
3. References
[1] Ioannis Caltzidis et al. ‘Atomic Faraday beam splitter for light generated from
pump-degenerate four-wave mixing in a hollow-core photonic crystal fiber’. In:
Physical Review A 103.4 (2021). Publisher: American Physical Society, p. 043501.
[2] C. F. McCormick et al. ‘Strong relative intensity squeezing by four-wave mixing
in rubidium vapor’. In: Optics Letters 32.2 (2007). Publisher: Optical Society of
America, pp. 178–180.
[3] Ran Finkelstein et al. ‘Fast, noise-free memory for photon synchronization at room
temperature’. In: Science Advances (2018). Publisher: American Association for
the Advancement of Science.
[4] K. T. Kaczmarek et al. ‘High-speed noise-free optical quantum memory’. In:
Physical Review A 97.4 (2018). Publisher: American Physical Society, p. 042316.
[5] Dmitry Budker and Michael Romalis. ‘Optical magnetometry’. In: Nature Physics
3.4 (2007). Bandiera abtest: a Cg type: Nature Research Journals Number: 4
Primary atype: Reviews Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 227–234.
[6] David H. Meyer, Paul D. Kunz and Kevin C. Cox. ‘Waveguide-Coupled Rydberg
Spectrum Analyzer from 0 to 20 GHz’. In: Physical Review Applied 15.1 (2021).
Publisher: American Physical Society, p. 014053.
[7] John C. Travers et al. ‘Ultrafast nonlinear optics in gas-filled hollow-core photonic
crystal fibers [Invited]’. In: JOSA B 28.12 (2011). Publisher: Optical Society of
America, A11–A26.
[8] Ana M. Cubillas et al. ‘Photonic crystal fibres for chemical sensing and
photochemistry’. In: Chemical Society Reviews 42.22 (2013). Publisher: The
Royal Society of Chemistry, pp. 8629–8648.
[9] G. Epple et al. ‘Rydberg atoms in hollow-core photonic crystal fibres’. In:
Nature Communications 5.1 (2014). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing
Group, pp. 1–5.
[10] Saikat Ghosh et al. ‘Low-Light-Level Optical Interactions with Rubidium Vapor in
a Photonic Band-Gap Fiber’. In: Physical Review Letters 97.2 (2006). Publisher:
American Physical Society, p. 023603.
[11] P. S. Light et al. ‘Electromagnetically induced transparency in Rb-filled coated
hollow-core photonic crystal fiber’. In: Optics Letters 32.10 (2007). Publisher:
Optical Society of America, pp. 1323–1325.
[12] G. Epple et al. ‘Effect of stray fields on Rydberg states in hollow-core PCF
probed by higher-order modes’. In: Optics Letters 42.17 (2017). Publisher: Optical
Society of America, pp. 3271–3274.
[13] A Urvoy et al. ‘Optical coherences and wavelength mismatch in ladder systems’.
In: Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 46.24 (2013),
p. 245001.

Spatially resolved spectroscopy of alkali metal vapour diffusing inside hollow-core photonic crystal fibres9
[14] Daniel Adam Steck. Quantum and Atom Optics. Google-Books-ID: bc9TMwEACAAJ.
2007. 835 pp.
[15] Mark A. Zentile et al. ‘ElecSus: A program to calculate the electric susceptibility of
an atomic ensemble’. In: Computer Physics Communications 189 (2015), pp. 162–
174.
[16] Georg Epple. ‘Spectroscopy of Rydberg Atoms in Hollow-Core Photonic Crystal
Fibers’. PhD thesis. 2017.
[17] Josephine Gutekunst et al. ‘Fiber-integrated spectroscopy device for hot alkali
vapor’. In: Applied Optics 56.21 (2017), p. 5898.

