Journal of Machine Learning Research 21 (2020) 1-52

Submitted 1/20; Revised 8/20; Published 8/20

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Tabish Rashid∗

tabish.rashid@cs.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford

Mikayel Samvelyan∗

mikayel@samvelyan.com

arXiv:2003.08839v2 [cs.LG] 27 Aug 2020

Russian-Armenian University

Christian Schroeder de Witt

cs@robots.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford

Gregory Farquhar

gregory.farquhar@cs.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford

Jakob Foerster

jnf@fb.com

Facebook AI Research

Shimon Whiteson

shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford

Editor: George Konidaris

Abstract

In many real-world settings, a team of agents must coordinate its behaviour while
acting in a decentralised fashion. At the same time, it is often possible to train the agents
in a centralised fashion where global state information is available and communication
constraints are lifted. Learning joint action-values conditioned on extra state information is
an attractive way to exploit centralised learning, but the best strategy for then extracting
decentralised policies is unclear. Our solution is QMIX, a novel value-based method that
can train decentralised policies in a centralised end-to-end fashion. QMIX employs a mixing
network that estimates joint action-values as a monotonic combination of per-agent values.
We structurally enforce that the joint-action value is monotonic in the per-agent values,
through the use of non-negative weights in the mixing network, which guarantees consistency
between the centralised and decentralised policies. To evaluate the performance of QMIX,
we propose the StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) as a new benchmark for deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning. We evaluate QMIX on a challenging set of SMAC
scenarios and show that it significantly outperforms existing multi-agent reinforcement
learning methods.
Keywords: Reinforcement Learning, Multi-Agent Learning, Multi-Agent Coordination

∗

. Equal contribution.

c 2020 Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and
Shimon Whiteson.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attribution requirements are provided
at http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-081.html.

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) holds considerable promise to help address a variety of cooperative multi-agent problems, such as coordination of robot swarms (Hüttenrauch et al., 2017)
and autonomous cars (Cao et al., 2012).
In many such settings, partial observability and/or communication constraints necessitate
the learning of decentralised policies, which condition only on the local action-observation
history of each agent. Decentralised policies also naturally attenuate the problem that joint
action spaces grow exponentially with the number of agents, often rendering the application
of traditional single-agent RL methods impractical.
Fortunately, decentralised policies can often be learned in a centralised fashion in a
simulated or laboratory setting. This often grants access to additional state information,
otherwise hidden from agents, and removes inter-agent communication constraints. The
paradigm of centralised training with decentralised execution (Oliehoek et al., 2008; Kraemer
and Banerjee, 2016) has recently attracted attention in the RL community (Jorge et al.,
2016; Foerster et al., 2018). However, many challenges surrounding how to best exploit
centralised training remain open.
One of these challenges is how to represent and use the action-value function that many
RL methods learn. On the one hand, properly capturing the effects of the agents’ actions
requires a centralised action-value function Qtot that conditions on the global state and the
joint action. On the other hand, such a function is difficult to learn when there are many
agents and, even if it can be learned, offers no obvious way to extract decentralised policies
that allow each agent to select only an individual action based on an individual observation.
The simplest option is to forgo a centralised action-value function and let each agent a
learn an individual action-value function Qa independently, as in independent Q-learning
(IQL) (Tan, 1993). However, this approach cannot explicitly represent interactions between
the agents and may not converge, as each agent’s learning is confounded by the learning
and exploration of others.
At the other extreme, we can learn a fully centralised action-value function Qtot and
then use it to guide the optimisation of decentralised policies in an actor-critic framework,
an approach taken by counterfactual multi-agent (COMA) policy gradients (Foerster et al.,
2018), as well as work by Gupta et al. (2017). However, this requires on-policy learning,
which can be sample-inefficient, and training the fully centralised critic becomes impractical
when there are more than a handful of agents.
In between these two extremes, we can learn a centralised but factored Qtot , an approach
taken by value decomposition networks (VDN) (Sunehag et al., 2017). By representing Qtot
as a sum of individual value functions Qa that condition only on individual observations and
actions, a decentralised policy arises simply from each agent selecting actions greedily with
respect to its Qa . However, VDN severely limits the complexity of centralised action-value
functions that can be represented and ignores any extra state information available during
training.
In this paper, we propose a new approach called QMIX which, like VDN, lies between the
extremes of IQL and COMA, but can represent a much richer class of action-value functions.
Key to our method is the insight that the full factorisation of VDN is not necessary to extract
decentralised policies. Instead, we only need to ensure that a global argmax performed on
2

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

(a) 3 Stalkers vs 5 Zealots

(b) 2 Collosi vs 64 Zerglings

Figure 1: Decentralised unit micromanagement in StarCraft II, where each learning agent
controls an individual unit. The goal is to coordinate behaviour across agents to
defeat all enemy units.

Qtot yields the same result as a set of individual argmax operations performed on each Qa .
To this end, it suffices to enforce a monotonicity constraint on the relationship between Qtot
and each Qa :
∂Qtot
≥ 0, ∀a.
(1)
∂Qa
QMIX consists of agent networks representing each Qa , and a mixing network that
combines them into Qtot , not as a simple sum as in VDN, but in a complex nonlinear way
that ensures consistency between the centralised and decentralised policies. At the same time,
it enforces the constraint of (1) by restricting the mixing network to have positive weights.
We use hypernetworks (Ha et al., 2017) to condition the weights of the mixing network
on the state, which is observed only during training. As a result, QMIX can represent
complex centralised action-value functions with a factored representation that scales well in
the number of agents and allows decentralised policies to be easily extracted via inexpensive
individual argmax operations.
To evaluate QMIX, as well as the growing number of other algorithms recently proposed
for multi-agent RL (Foerster et al., 2018; Sunehag et al., 2017), we introduce the StarCraft
Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC)1 . In single-agent RL, standard environments such as the
Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et al., 2013) and MuJoCo (Plappert et al., 2018)
have facilitated rapid progress. While some multi-agent testbeds have emerged, such as
Poker (Heinrich and Silver, 2016), Pong (Tampuu et al., 2017), Keepaway Soccer (Stone
et al., 2005), or simple gridworld-like environments (Lowe et al., 2017; Leibo et al., 2017;
Yang et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2017), there are currently no challenging standard testbeds
for centralised training with decentralised execution with the exception of the recently
introduced Hanabi Challenge (Bard et al., 2020) which focusses on a setting with less than
5 agents.
SMAC fills this gap. It is built on the popular real-time strategy game StarCraft II and
makes use of the SC2LE environment (Vinyals et al., 2017). Instead of tackling the full
game of StarCraft with centralised control, it focuses on decentralised micromanagement
1. Code is available at https://github.com/oxwhirl/smac.

3

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

challenges (Figure 1). In these challenges, each of our units is controlled by an independent,
learning agent that has to act based only on local observations, while the opponent’s units are
controlled by the hand-coded built-in StarCraft II AI. SMAC offers a diverse set of scenarios
that challenge algorithms to handle high-dimensional inputs and partial observability, and
to learn coordinated behaviour even when restricted to fully decentralised execution. In
contrast to the diverse set of scenarios included in SMAC, the Hanabi Challenge focusses on
a single task involving between 2-5 agents designed to test agents’ ability to reason about the
actions of the other agents (an ability in humans referred to as theory of mind (Rabinowitz
et al., 2018)).
To further facilitate research in this field, we also open-source PyMARL, a learning
framework that can serve as a starting point for other researchers and includes implementations of several key multi-agent RL algorithms. PyMARL is modular, extensible, built on
PyTorch, and serves as a template for dealing with some of the unique challenges of deep
multi-agent RL in practice. We also offer a set of guidelines for best practices in evaluations
using our benchmark, including the reporting of standardised performance metrics, sample
efficiency, and computational requirements (see Section 7).
Our experiments on SMAC show that QMIX outperforms IQL, VDN, and COMA, both
in terms of absolute performance and learning speed. In particular, our method shows
considerable performance gains on the harder tasks in SMAC, and tasks with heterogeneous
agents. Moreover, our analysis and ablations show both the necessity of conditioning on the
state information and a flexible multi-layer network for mixing of agent Q-values in order to
achieve consistent performance across tasks.
Since its introduction by Rashid et al. (2018), QMIX has become an important valuebased algorithm in discrete action environments. It has inspired a number of extensions and
follow-up work (Section 2.4) and is a prominent point of comparison in any work that utilises
SMAC (Section 2.5). Recently it is becoming increasingly common (and arguably necessary)
to evaluate deep multi-agent RL algorithms on non-gridworld environments. This has been
driven in part by the introduction of PyMARL and SMAC, which provide an open-source
codebase and a standardised testbed for evaluating and comparing deep multi-agent RL
algorithms.2
2. This work was originally published as a conference paper (Rashid et al., 2018). The main additions in
this article are:
• Introducing SMAC, a benchmark for the cooperative multi-agent RL setting of centralised training
and decentralised execution (Section 7).
• Releasing PyMARL, a framework for running and developing multi-agent RL algorithms (Section 8).
• Experimental results comparing IQL, VDN, COMA, and QTRAN on the SMAC benchmark (Section
9).
• Further analysis and ablation experiments to investigate why QMIX outperforms VDN (Sections 6
and 10).
• Comprehensive literature review of classical as well as novel cooperative multi-agent RL approaches
(Section 2).

4

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

2. Related Work
Recent work in multi-agent RL has started moving from tabular methods (Yang and Gu,
2004; Busoniu et al., 2008) to deep learning methods that can tackle high-dimensional state
and action spaces (Tampuu et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2017; Schroeder de
Witt et al., 2018). In this paper, we focus on the fully-cooperative setting in which all
agents must maximise a joint reward signal in the paradigm of centralised training and
decentralised execution.
2.1 Independent Learners
A natural approach to producing decentraliseable agents in a multi-agent system is to
directly learn decentralised value functions or policies. Independent Q-learning (Tan, 1993)
trains independent action-value functions for each agent using Q-learning (Watkins, 1989).
Tampuu et al. (2017) extend this approach to deep neural networks using DQN (Mnih et al.,
2015). While trivially achieving decentralisation, these approaches are prone to instability
arising from the non-stationarity of the environment induced by simultaneously learning and
exploring agents. Foerster et al. (2017) addresses the issue of non-stationarity when using
an experience replay with independent learners to some extent. Lauer and Riedmiller (2000)
ignore updates which decrease Q-value estimates in order to not prematurely underestimate
an action’s Q-value due to the exploratory actions of other agents. In a tabular setting,
they prove this converges to the optimal policy in deterministic environments, provided
there is a unique optimal joint-action. Matignon et al. (2007) introduce Hysteretic Qlearning which instead uses a smaller learning rate for decreasing Q-value estimates, which
is slightly more robust to stochasticity and the presence of multiple optimal joint actions.
Omidshafiei et al. (2017) utilises Hysteretic Q-learning in a multi-task deep RL setting. Panait
et al. (2008) introduce Leniency which ignores updates that decrease Q-value estimates
with a probability that is decreasing during training. Wei and Luke (2016) show that
Leniency outperforms Hysteretic Q-learning in cooperative stochastic games, and Palmer
et al. (2018) extend Leniency to the deep RL setting and show benefits over Hysteretic and
fully Independent Q-learners on deterministic and stochastic gridworlds with two agents.
Palmer et al. (2019) maintain a learned interval whose lower bound is approximately the
minimum cumulative reward received when all agents are coordinating. They use this
interval when decreasing Q-value estimates to distinguish between miscoordination between
the agents and the stochasticity of the environment, which Hysteretic and Lenient learners
do not distinguish between. Lu and Amato (2019) utilise Distributional RL (Bellemare
et al., 2017) in combination with Hysteretic Q-learning in order to also distinguish between
miscoordination and stochasticity, and argue their approach is more stable and robust to
hyperparameters than the above methods. All of these approaches do not utilise extra state
information available during a centralised training regime, nor do they attempt to learn
joint action-value functions.
2.2 Centralised Execution
In settings where decentralised execution is not mandatory, the centralised learning of
joint action-value function naturally handles the coordination problems and avoids the
5

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

non-stationarity problem. Nonetheless, a centralised action-value function is impractical
to scale since the joint action space grows exponentially in the number of agents. Classical
approaches to scalable centralised learning include coordination graphs (Guestrin et al., 2002),
which exploit conditional independencies between agents by decomposing a global reward
function into a sum of agent-local terms. This can significantly reduce the computation
required in order to find the maximum joint action (depending on the exact structure of the
coordination graph supplied) through message passing or variable elimination algorithms.
However, specifying an appropriate coordination graph (i.e. not fully-connected) can require
significant domain knowledge. Sparse cooperative Q-learning (Kok and Vlassis, 2006) is a
tabular Q-learning algorithm that learns to coordinate the actions of a group of cooperative
agents only in the states in which such coordination is necessary, encoding those dependencies
in a coordination graph. Both methods require the dependencies between agents to be
pre-supplied, whereas we do not require such prior knowledge. Castellini et al. (2019)
investigate the representational capacity of coordination graphs in a deep RL setting using
one-step matrix games. Bhmer et al. (2019) also extend coordination graphs to the deep RL
setting, making use of parameter sharing and limiting the graphs to contain only pairwise
edges, in order to consider more complex scenarios. Chen et al. (2018) similarly factor the
joint Q-function into pairwise interaction terms, performing maximisation using coordinate
ascent instead of message-passing. QMIX (and VDN) correspond to the case of a degenerate
fully disconnected coordination graph, thus enabling fully decentralised execution.
DIAL (Foerster et al., 2016) utilises an end-to-end differentiable architecture that
allows for a learned inter-agent communication to emerge via backpropagation. CommNet
(Sukhbaatar et al., 2016) use a centralised network architecture to exchange information
between agents. BicNet (Peng et al., 2017) utilise bidirectional RNNs for inter-agent
communication in an actor-critic setting and additionally requires estimating individual
agent rewards. MAGNet (Malysheva et al., 2018) allow agents to centrally learn a shared
graph structure that encodes the relevance of individual environment entities to each agent.
Based on this graph, agents can communicate and coordinate their actions during centralised
execution. Zhao and Ma (2019) show that the performance of decentralised policies can be
improved upon through a centralised communication scheme that uses a central informationfiltering neural network in between timesteps. Clustered Deep Q-Networks (CDQN) (Pageaud
et al., 2019) use a hierarchical approach in order to scale learning to more agents and larger
joint action spaces. Low-level agents are clustered into groups, each of which is managed by a
higher-level agent within a centralised execution setting. All low-level agents within a cluster
execute the same action selected by a vote, which alleviates some of the non-stationarity of
the independent learning setting. In contrast to these approaches, QMIX does not require
any form of inter-agent communication during decentralised execution.
2.3 Centralised Training and Decentralised Execution
A number of methods have developed hybrid approaches that exploit the centralised training
opportunity for training fully decentralised policies. Gupta et al. (2017) present a centralised
actor-critic algorithm with per-agent critics, which scales easily with the number of agents.
Similarly, Lowe et al. (2017) present MADDPG, which learns a centralised critic for each
agent and apply this to competitive games with continuous action spaces. In contrast to
6

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Gupta et al. (2017), MADDPG takes advantage of the centralised training paradigm by
incorporating information from the other agents into the critics, at the expense of scalability
due to the increased input size. COMA (Foerster et al., 2018) instead uses a single centralised
critic to train decentralised actors in the fully-cooperative setting, estimating a counterfactual
advantage function for each agent in order to address multi-agent credit assignment. Iqbal
and Sha (2018) devise an actor-critic algorithm with per-agent critics that share an attention
mechanism in order to improve scalability compared to a single centralised critic. Their
approach allows for the agents to have differing action spaces as well allowing for individual
rewards. The authors do not compare against QMIX and do not evaluate on environments
of similar complexity as StarCraft. Schroeder de Witt et al. (2018) construct a multi-agent
actor-critic algorithm with a hierarchical actor policy that is able to use common knowledge
between agents for coordination. Learning Individual Intrinsic Reward (LIIR) (Du et al.,
2019) learns an intrinsic reward function for each agent to supplement the team reward. The
intrinsic reward function is trained such that it maximises the team reward function. As a
bi-level optimisation process, LIIR is significantly less computationally efficient than QMIX
and has not been demonstrated to scale to large numbers of agents. These approaches are
all actor-critic variants which use the policy-gradient theorem, and thus are prone to get
stuck sub-optimal local minima. Additionally, all but MADDPG are on-policy algorithms
which can have poor sample efficiency compared to off-policy algorithms such as QMIX.

Lin et al. (2019) train a centralised action-value function Q which has access to observations of all agent. They then train the decentralised agents via supervised learning to
mimic the actions of the centralised policy. Distilling a centralised policy into decentralised
agent policies can be problematic since the centralised policy conditions on more information
than any of the agents’ policies. QMIX instead learns a factored joint Q-function that
can be easily decentralised due to its architecture. Sunehag et al. (2017) propose value
decomposition networks (VDN), which allow for centralised value function learning with
decentralised execution. Their algorithm decomposes a central action-value function into a
sum of individual agent terms. VDN does not make use of additional state information during
training and can represent only a limited class of centralised action-value functions. Son et al.
(2019) introduce QTRAN which learns a centralised, unrestricted, joint Q-function as well
as a VDN-factored joint Q-function that is decentralisable. Since the unrestricted Q-value
cannot be maximised efficiently, the VDN-factored Q is used to produce the (approximate)
maximum joint-action. They show that solving a linear optimisation problem involving
all joint actions, in which the VDN-factored Q-value matches the unrestricted Q-value for
the approximated maximum joint action and over-estimates for every other action, results
in decentralisable policies with the correct argmax. This allows QTRAN to represent a
much larger class of joint Q-function than QMIX, as well as produce decentralisable policies for them. However, exactly solving the linear optimisation problem is prohibitively
expensive. Thus, the authors instead optimise a soft approximation using L2 penalties via
stochastic gradient descent. In practice, optimising this loss is difficult which results in poor
performance for QTRAN on complex environments such as SMAC.
7

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

2.4 Extensions of QMIX
Mahajan et al. (2019) show that the representational constraints of QMIX can prohibit
it from learning an optimal policy. Importantly, they show that this is exacerbated by
increased -greedy exploration. They introduce MAVEN, which conditions QMIX agents on
a shared latent space whose value is chosen at the beginning of an episode by a hierarchical
policy. Note that this requires access to the initial state and communication at the first
timestep. A mutual information loss is added to encourage diversity of trajectories across the
shared latent space, which allows for relatively-greedy agents (once conditioned on the latent
variable) to still achieve committed exploration during training similar to Bootstrapped
DQN (Osband et al., 2016). This results in significant performance gains on some scenarios
in SMAC (Samvelyan et al., 2019).
Action Semantics Networks (ASN) (Wang et al., 2019b) extends QMIX with a novel agent
network architecture that separates each agent’s Q-value estimation of actions that influence
other agents from those actions that do not. The Q-values for actions which influence another
agent are computed using the relevant parts of the current agent’s observation (e.g. the
relative position of another agent). Thus, ASN requires intimate a priori knowledge about
an environment’s action semantics and the structure of the agent’s observations, whereas
QMIX does not.
Wang et al. (2019a) extend QMIX to a setting which allows for communication between
agents. Their approach allows agents to condition their Q-values on messages from other
agents, which take the form of a real-valued vector. An entropy loss and a mutual information
loss incentivise the learning of succinct and expressive messages. Zhang et al. (2019) also
allow for each agent’s Q-values to condition on vector-valued messages from other agents.
However, they only utilise the messages from other agents if their gap between the best and
second-best action is small enough (interpreted as uncertainty in the best choice of action).
Additionally, they minimise the variance of the messages across actions to limit noisy or
uninformative messages.
SMIX(λ) (Yao et al., 2019) replaces the 1-step Q-learning target of QMIX with a
SARSA(λ) target. They incorrectly claim that the Q-learning update rule is responsible
for the representational limitations of QMIX, instead of the non-negative weights in the
mixing network which enforces monotonicity. They also incorrectly claim that their method
can represent a larger class of joint action-value functions than QMIX. Since they also use
non-negative weights in their mixing network, SMIX(λ) can represent exactly the same
class of value functions as QMIX.
Liu et al. (2019) investigate transfer learning algorithms in a multi-agent setting using
QMIX as a base. Yang et al. (2019) use DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2018) to learn lower-level
skills that a higher level QMIX agent uses. Fu et al. (2019) extend QMIX to allow for action
spaces consisting of both discrete and continuous actions.
The applicability of QMIX in real-world application domains has also been considered
such as robot swarm coordination (Httenrauch et al., 2018) and stratospheric geoengineering
(Schroeder de Witt and Hornigold, 2019).
QMIX has been extended from discrete to continuous action spaces (Schroeder de Witt
et al., 2020, COMIX). COMIX uses the cross-entropy method to approximate the otherwise
intractable greedy per-agent action maximisation step. Schroeder de Witt et al. (2020) also
8

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

present experiments with FacMADDPG, i.e., MADDPG with a factored critic, which show
that QMIX-like network factorisations also perform well in actor-critic settings. COMIX has
been found to outperform previous state-of-the-art MADDPG in continuous robotic control
suite Multi-Agent Mujoco, thereby illustrating its versatility beyond SMAC.
2.5 PyMARL and SMAC
A number of papers have established unit micromanagement in StarCraft as a benchmark for
deep multi-agent RL. Usunier et al. (2017) present an algorithm using a centralised greedy
MDP and first-order optimisation which they evaluate on Starcraft: BroodWar (Synnaeve
et al., 2016). Peng et al. (2017) also evaluate their methods on StarCraft. However, neither
requires decentralised execution. Similar to our setup in SMAC is the work of Foerster et al.
(2017), who evaluate replay stabilisation methods for IQL on combat scenarios with up to
five agents. Foerster et al. (2018) also uses this setting.
In this paper, we construct unit micromanagement tasks using the StarCraft II Learning
Environment (SC2LE) (Vinyals et al., 2017) as opposed to StarCraft, since it is actively
supported by the game developers and offers a more stable testing environment. The full
game of StarCraft II has already been used as an RL environment (Vinyals et al., 2017), and
DeepMind’s AlphaStar (Vinyals et al., 2019) has recently shown an impressive level of play
on a StarCraft II matchup using a centralised controller. By contrast, SMAC introduces
strict decentralisation and local partial observability to turn the StarCraft II game engine
into a new set of decentralised cooperative multi-agent problems.
Since their introduction, SMAC and PyMARL have been used by a number of papers to
evaluate and compare multi-agent RL methods (Schroeder de Witt et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2019c; Du et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a; Zhang et al., 2019; Mahajan et al., 2019; Yao
et al., 2019; Bhmer et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019b).
2.6 Hypernetworks and Monotonic Networks
QMIX relies on a neural network to transform the centralised state into the weights of
another neural network, in a manner reminiscent of hypernetworks (Ha et al., 2017). This
second neural network is constrained to be monotonic with respect to its inputs by keeping
its weights positive. Dugas et al. (2009) also investigate such functional restrictions for
neural networks.

3. Background
A fully cooperative multi-agent sequential decision-making task can be described as a
decentralised partially observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek and
Amato, 2016) consisting of a tuple G = hS, U, P, r, Z, O, n, γi. s ∈ S describes the true state
of the environment. At each time step, each agent a ∈ A ≡ {1, ..., n} chooses an action
ua ∈ U , forming a joint action u ∈ U ≡ U n . This causes a transition on the environment
according to the state transition function P (s0 |s, u) : S × U × S → [0, 1]. All agents share
the same reward function r(s, u) : S × U → R and γ ∈ [0, 1) is a discount factor.
We consider a partially observable scenario in which each agent draws individual observations z ∈ Z according to observation function O(s, a) : S × A → Z. Each agent
9

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

has an action-observation history τ a ∈ T ≡ (Z × U )∗ , on which it conditions a stochastic
policy π a (ua |τ a ) : T × U → [0, 1]. The joint policy
a joint action-value function:
P∞ π has
π
i
Q (st , ut ) = Est+1:∞ ,ut+1:∞ [Rt |st , ut ], where Rt = i=0 γ rt+i is the discounted return.
We operate in the framework of centralised training with decentralised execution, i.e.
the learning algorithm has access to all local action-observation histories τ and global state
s, but each agent’s learnt policy can condition only on its own action-observation history τ a .
3.1 Deep Q-Learning
Deep Q-learning represents the action-value function with a deep neural network parameterised by θ. Deep Q-networks (DQNs) (Mnih et al., 2015) use a replay memory to store the
transition tuple hs, u, r, s0 i, where the state s0 is observed after taking the action u in state
s and receiving reward r. θ is learnt by sampling batches of b transitions from the replay
memory and minimising the squared TD error :
b 
2 
X
L(θ) =
yiDQN − Q(s, u; θ)
,
(2)
i=1

where y DQN = r + γ maxu0 Q(s0 , u0 ; θ− ). θ− are the parameters of a target network that are
periodically copied from θ and kept constant for a number of iterations.
3.2 Deep Recurrent Q-Learning
In partially observable settings, agents can benefit from conditioning on their entire actionobservation history. Hausknecht and Stone (2015) propose deep recurrent Q-networks
(DRQN) that make use of recurrent neural networks. Typically, gated architectures such
as LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) or GRU (Chung et al., 2014) are used to
facilitate learning over longer timescales.
3.3 Independent Q-Learning
Perhaps the most commonly applied method in multi-agent learning is independent Qlearning (IQL) (Tan, 1993), which decomposes a multi-agent problem into a collection of
simultaneous single-agent problems that share the same environment. This approach does
not address the non-stationarity introduced due to the changing policies of the learning
agents, and thus, unlike Q-learning, has no convergence guarantees even in the limit of
infinite exploration. In practice, nevertheless, IQL commonly serves as a surprisingly strong
baseline even in mixed and competitive games (Tampuu et al., 2017; Leibo et al., 2017).
3.4 Value Decomposition Networks
By contrast, value decomposition networks (VDNs) (Sunehag et al., 2017) aim to learn
a joint action-value function Qtot (τ , u), where τ ∈ T ≡ T n is a joint action-observation
history and u is a joint action. It represents Qtot as a sum of individual value functions
Qa (τ a , ua ; θa ), one for each agent a, that condition only on individual action-observation
histories:
n
X
Qtot (τ , u) =
Qi (τ i , ui ; θi ).
(3)
i=1

10

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Strictly speaking, each Qa is a utility function (Guestrin et al., 2002) and not a value
function since by itself it does not estimate an expected return. However, for terminological
simplicity we refer to both Qtot and Qa as value functions.
The loss function for VDN is equivalent to (2), where Q is replaced by Qtot . An advantage
of this representation is that a decentralised policy arises simply from each agent performing
greedy action selection with respect to its Qa .

4. QMIX
In this section, we propose a new approach called QMIX which, like VDN, lies between the
extremes of IQL and centralised Q-learning. However, QMIX can represent a much richer
class of action-value functions than VDN.
Key to our method is the insight that the full factorisation of VDN is not necessary
in order to extract decentralised policies that are fully consistent with their centralised
counterpart. As long as the environment is not adversarial, there exists a deterministic
optimal policy conditioned on the full action-observation history. Hence, we only need
to establish consistency between the deterministic greedy decentralised policies and the
deterministic greedy centralised policy based on the optimal joint action-value function.
When the greedy decentralised policies are determined by an argmax over the Qa , consistency
holds if a global argmax performed on Qtot yields the same result as a set of individual
argmax operations performed on each Qa :

argmaxu1 Q1 (τ 1 , u1 )


..
argmax Qtot (τ , u) = 
.
.
u
argmaxun Qn (τ n , un )


(4)

This allows each agent a to participate in a decentralised execution solely by choosing greedy
actions with respect to its Qa . As a side effect, if (4) is satisfied, then taking the argmax of
Qtot , required by off-policy learning updates, is trivially tractable without an exhaustive
evaluation of Qtot for the exponentially many joint actions.
VDN’s representation is sufficient to satisfy (4). However, QMIX is based on the
observation that this representation can be generalised to the larger family of monotonic
functions that also satisfy (4). Monotonicity in this context is defined as a constraint on the
relationship between Qtot and each Qa :
∂Qtot
≥ 0, ∀a ∈ A,
∂Qa
which is sufficient to satisfy (4), as the following theorem shows.
tot
Theorem 1 If ∀a ∈ A ≡ {1, 2, ..., n}, ∂Q
∂Qa ≥ 0 then


argmaxu1 Q1 (τ 1 , u1 )


..
argmax Qtot (τ , u) = 
.
.
u
argmaxun Qn (τ n , un )


11

(5)

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Figure 2: The discrete per-agent action-value scores Qa are fed into the monotonic function
Qtot (Q1 , Q2 ). The maximum Qa for each agent is shown in blue, which corresponds
to the maximum Qtot also shown in blue. The constraint (4) is satisfied due to
the monotonicity of Qtot .

Proof Proof is provided in Appendix A.
Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between Qtot and individual Qa functions, and how
monotonicity leads to a decentralisable argmax in an example with two agents with three
possible actions. Each agent a produces scores Qa (ua ) for each discrete action that it can take
(columns with the local argmax in blue). These are the inputs to a continuous monotonic
mixing function Qtot (Q1 , ..., QN ), the output of which is represented by the monotonically
increasing heatmap. The intersections of the blue lines indicate the estimated Qtot for each of
the discrete joint actions. Due to the monotonicity of Qtot , these joint-action value estimates
maintain the ordering corresponding to each agent’s Qa , for that agent’s actions when the
other agents’ actions remain fixed. The result is that the global greedy joint action of Qtot ,
indicated by the blue dot, corresponds to the set of decentralised greedy actions.
We now describe how QMIX enforces (5) in practice, by representing Qtot using an
architecture consisting of agent networks, a mixing network, and a set of hypernetworks (Ha
et al., 2017). Figure 3 illustrates the overall setup.
For each agent a, there is one agent network that represents its individual value function
Qa (τ a , ua ). We represent agent networks as DRQNs that receive the current individual
observation oat and the last action uat−1 as input at each time step, as shown in Figure 3c.
We include the last actions since they are part of the action-observation history τ a on which
the decentralised policy can condition. Due to the use of stochastic policies during training,
it is necessary to provide the actual action that was executed in the environment. If weights
are shared across the agent networks in order to speed up learning, agent IDs are included
as part of the observations to allow for heterogeneous policies.
12

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: (a) Mixing network structure. In red are the hypernetworks that produce the
weights and biases for mixing network layers shown in blue. (b) The overall QMIX
architecture. (c) Agent network structure. Best viewed in colour.

The mixing network is a feed-forward neural network that takes the agent network
outputs as input and mixes them monotonically, producing the values of Qtot , as shown in
Figure 3a. To enforce the monotonicity constraint of (5), the weights (but not the biases) of
the mixing network are restricted to be non-negative. This allows the mixing network to
approximate any monotonic function arbitrarily closely in the limit of infinite width (Dugas
et al., 2009).
The weights of each layer of the mixing network are produced by separate hypernetworks.
Each hypernetwork takes the state s as input and generates the weights of one layer of the
mixing network. Each hypernetwork consists of two fully-connected layers with a ReLU
nonlinearity, followed by an absolute activation function, to ensure that the mixing network
weights are non-negative. The output of the hypernetwork is then a vector, which is reshaped
into a matrix of appropriate size. The biases are produced in the same manner but are
not restricted to being non-negative. The first bias is produced by a hypernetwork with a
single linear layer, and the final bias is produced by a two-layer hypernetwork with a ReLU
nonlinearity. Figure 3a illustrates the mixing network and the hypernetworks.
The state is used by the hypernetworks rather than being passed directly into the mixing
network because Qtot is allowed to depend on the extra state information in non-monotonic
ways. Thus, it would be overly constraining to pass some function of s through the monotonic
network alongside the per-agent values. Instead, the use of hypernetworks makes it possible
to condition the weights of the monotonic network on s in an arbitrary way, thus integrating
the full state s into the joint action-value estimates as flexibly as possible. The choice of
nonlinearity for the mixing network is also an important consideration due to its interaction
with the non-negative weights. A ReLU is not a good choice since a negative input to the
mixing network is likely to remain negative (depending on the biases), which would then be
zeroed out by the ReLU leading to no gradients for all agent networks. It is for this reason
that we use an ELU.
13

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

QMIX is trained end-to-end to minimise the following loss:
L(θ) =

b h
X

2 i
yitot − Qtot (τ , u, s; θ)
,

(6)

i=1

where b is the batch size of transitions sampled from the replay buffer, the DQN target is
given by y tot = r + γ maxu0 Qtot (τ 0 , u0 , s0 ; θ− ), and θ− are the parameters of a target network
as in DQN. (6) is analogous to the standard DQN loss of (2). Since (4) holds, we can
perform the maximisation of Qtot in time linear in the number of agents (as opposed to
scaling exponentially in the worst case).
The mixing network relies on centralised training, although it may be discarded after
training to allow fully decentralised execution of the learned joint policy. In a setting with
limited communication, the core algorithmic mechanism of QMIX can still be applied: the
mixing network can be viewed as a manager that coordinates learning, but requires only the
communication of low-dimensional action-values from, and gradients to, the decentralised
agents. In a setting without communication constraints, we can further exploit the centralised
training setting by, e.g., sharing parameters between agents for more efficient learning.
In Algorithm 1 we outline the pseudocode for the particular implementation of QMIX we
use for all of our experiments. The choice to gather rollouts from an entire episode (line 17)
before executing a single gradient descent step (line 24), as well as using per-agent -greedy
action selection (line 10), is not a requirement for QMIX but is an implementation detail.
However, the action selection based solely on agent network’s Q-values (line 10), as well
as calculation of Qtot and its target using the mixing network and hypernetworks (lines
19-20) are essential features of QMIX. The update of per-agent action-value functions and
hypernetworks using the DQN-style loss with respect to Qtot and joint reward (lines 22-24)
is also central to our method.
4.1 Representational Complexity
The value function class representable with QMIX includes any value function that can be
factored into a nonlinear monotonic combination of the agents’ individual value functions in
the fully observable setting.
This follows since the mixing network is a universal function approximator of monotonic
functions (Dugas et al., 2009), and hence can represent any value function that factors into a
nonlinear monotonic combination of the agent’s individual value functions. Additionally, we
require that the agent’s individual value functions order the values of the actions appropriately.
By this we mean that Qa is such that Qa (st , ua ) > Qa (st , u0a ) ⇐⇒ Qtot (st , (u−a , ua )) >
Qtot (st , (u−a , u0a )), i.e., they can represent a function that respects the ordering of the
agent’s actions in the joint-action value function. Since the agents’ networks are universal
function approximators (Pinkus, 1999), they can represent such a Qa . Hence QMIX is able
to represent any value function that factors into a nonlinear monotonic combination of the
agent’s individual value functions.
In a Dec-POMDP, QMIX cannot necessarily represent the true optimal Q-function.
This is because each agent’s observations are no longer the full state, and thus they might
not be able to distinguish the true state given their local observations. If the agent’s
value function ordering is then wrong, i.e., Qa (τ a , u) > Qa (τ a , u0 ) when Qtot (st , (u−a , u)) <
14

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Algorithm 1 QMIX
1: Initialise θ, the parameters of mixing network, agent networks and hypernetwork.
2: Set the learning rate α and replay buffer D = {}
3: step = 0, θ − = θ
4: while step < stepmax do
5:
t = 0, s0 = initial state
6:
while st 6= terminal and t < episode limit do
7:
for each agent a do
a ∪ {(o , u
8:
τta = τt−1
t t−1 )}
9:
 = epsilon-schedule(step)
(
argmaxuat Q(τta , uat ) with probability 1 − 
10:
uat =
randint(1, |U |)
with probability 
11:
end for
12:
Get reward rt and next state st+1
13:
D = D ∪ {(st , ut , rt , st+1 )}
14:
t = t + 1, step = step + 1
15:
end while
16:
if |D| > batch-size then
17:
b ← random batch of episodes from D
18:
for each timestep t in each episode in batch b do
19:
Qtot = Mixing-network (Q1 (τt1 , u1t ), . . . , Qn (τtn , unt ); Hypernetwork(st ; θ))
20:
Calculate target Qtot using Mixing-network with Hypernetwork(st ; θ− ))
21:
end for
22:
∆Qtot = y tot − Qtot // Eq (6)
23:
∆θ = ∇θ (∆Qtot )2
24:
θ = θ − α∆θ
25:
end if
26:
if update-interval steps have passed then
27:
θ− = θ
28:
end if
29: end while
Qtot (st , (u−a , u0 )), then the mixing network would be unable to correctly represent Qtot
given the monotonicity constraints.
QMIX thus expands upon the linear monotonic value functions that are representable
by VDN. Table 1a gives an example of a monotonic value function for the simple case of
a two-agent matrix game. Note that VDN is unable to represent this simple monotonic
value function. Table 2a provides the optimal Qtot values for VDN, minimising a squared
loss. Section 5 additionally provides results for the values that VDN learns in a function
approximation setting.
However, the constraint in (5) prevents QMIX from representing value functions that do
not factorise in such a manner. A simple example of such a value function for a two-agent
matrix game is given in Table 1b. Intuitively, any value function for which an agent’s best
action depends on the actions of the other agents at the same time step will not factorise
15

Agent 2

Agent 2

A

B

A

B

A

0

1

A

2

1

B

1

8

B

1

8

Agent 1

Agent 1

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

(a)

(b)

Agent 2

Agent 2

A

B

A

B

A

-1.5

2.5

A

4/3

4/3

B

2.5

6.5

B

4/3

8

Agent 1

Agent 1

Table 1: (a) An example of a monotonic payoff matrix, (b) a nonmonotonic payoff matrix.

(a)

(b)

Table 2: (a) Optimal Qtot values for VDN on the example in Table 1a. (b) Optimal Qtot
values for QMIX on the example in Table 1b.

appropriately, and hence cannot be perfectly represented by QMIX. Table 2b provides
the optimal Qtot values for QMIX when minimising a squared loss. For the example in
Table 1b, QMIX still recovers the optimal policy and learns the correct maximum over the
Q-values. Formally, the class of value functions that cannot be represented by QMIX are
called nonmonotonic (Mahajan et al., 2019).
Although QMIX cannot perfectly represent all value functions, its increased representational capacity allows it to learn Q-value estimates that are more accurate for computing
the target values to regress onto during Q-learning targets (bootstrapping). In particular,
we show in Section 5 that the increased representational capacity allows for QMIX to
learn the optimal policy in an environment with no per-timestep coordination, compared
to VDN which still fails to learns the optimal policy. In Section 6 we show that QMIX
learns significantly more accurate maxima over Qtot in randomly generated matrix games,
demonstrating that it learns better Q-value estimates for bootstrapping. Finally, we show in
Section 9 that QMIX significantly outperforms VDN on the challenging SMAC benchmark.

5. Two-Step Game
To illustrate the effects of representational complexity of VDN and QMIX, we devise a
simple two-step cooperative matrix game for two agents.
At the first step, Agent 1 chooses which of the two matrix games to play in the next
timestep. For the first time step, the actions of Agent 2 have no effect. In the second step,
both agents choose an action and receive a global reward according to the payoff matrices
depicted in Table 3.
16

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Agent 2

Agent 2

A

B

A

B

A

7

7

A

0

1

B

7

7

B

1

8

Agent 1

Agent 1

We train VDN and QMIX on this task for 5000 episodes and examine the final learned
value functions in the limit of full exploration ( = 1). Full exploration ensures that
each method is guaranteed to eventually explore all available game states, such that the
representational capacity of the state-action value function approximation remains the
only limitation. The full details of the architecture and hyperparameters used, as well as
additional results are provided in Appendix B.

State 2A

State 2B

Table 3: Payoff matrices of the two-step game after the Agent 1 chose the first action. Action
A takes the agents to State 2A and action B takes them to State 2B.

State 1

State 2A

State 2B

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

6.94

6.94

6.99

7.02

-1.87

2.31

B

6.35

6.36

6.99

7.02

2.33

6.51

A

B

A

B

A

B

(b) A

6.93

6.93

7.00

7.00

0.00

1.00

B

7.92

7.92

7.00

7.00

1.00

8.00

(a)

Table 4: Qtot on the two-step game for (a) VDN and (b) QMIX.
Table 4, which shows the learned values for Qtot , demonstrates that QMIX’s higher
representational capacity allows it to accurately represent the joint-action value function
whereas VDN cannot. This directly translates into VDN learning the suboptimal strategy
of selecting Action A at the first step and receiving a reward of 7, whereas QMIX recovers
the optimal strategy from its learnt joint-action values and receives a reward of 8.
The simple example presented in this section demonstrates the importance of accurate
Q-value estimates, especially for the purpose of bootstrapping. In Section 6 we provide
further evidence that QMIX’s increased representational capacity allows it to learn more
accurate Q-value, that directly lead to more accurate bootstrapped estimates.

6. Random Matrix Games
To demonstrate that QMIX learns more accurate Q-values than VDN for the purpose of
bootstrapping, we compare the learnt values of maxu Qtot (s, u) on randomly generated
matrix games. Single-step matrix games allow us to compare the learnt maximum Q-values
17

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

across both methods in isolation. We focus on maxu Qtot (s, u) because it is the only learnt
quantity involved in the bootstrapping for 1-step Q-learning.
The maximum return for each matrix is 10, and all other values are drawn uniformly
from [0, 10). Each individual seed has different values for the payoff matrix, but within each
run they remain fixed. We set  = 1 to ensure all actions are sampled and trained on equally.

Figure 4: The median maxu Qtot (s, u) for {2, 3, 4} agents with {2, 3, 4} actions across 10
runs for VDN and QMIX. 25%-75% quartile is shown shaded. The dashed line at
10 indicates the correct value.

Figure 4 shows the results for a varying number of agents and actions. We can see that
QMIX learns significantly more accurate maxima than VDN due to its larger representational
capacity.

7. The StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge
In this section, we describe the StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) to which we apply
QMIX and a number of other methods. SMAC is based on the popular real-time strategy
(RTS) game StarCraft II. In a regular full game of StarCraft II, one or more humans compete
against each other or against a built-in game AI to gather resources, construct buildings,
and build armies of units to defeat their opponents.
Akin to most RTSs, StarCraft has two main gameplay components: macromanagement
and micromanagement. Macromanagement refers to high-level strategic considerations, such
as economy and resource management. Micromanagement (micro), on the other hand, refers
to fine-grained control of individual units.
StarCraft has been used as a research platform for AI, and more recently, RL. Typically,
the game is framed as a competitive problem: an agent takes the role of a human player,
18

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Figure 5: The cyan and red circles respectively border the sight and shooting range of the
agent.

making macromanagement decisions and performing micromanagement as a puppeteer that
issues orders to individual units from a centralised controller.
In order to build a rich multi-agent testbed, we instead focus solely on micromanagement.
Micro is a vital aspect of StarCraft gameplay with a high skill ceiling, and is practiced in
isolation by amateur and professional players. For SMAC, we leverage the natural multi-agent
structure of micromanagement by proposing a modified version of the problem designed
specifically for decentralised control. In particular, we require that each unit be controlled
by an independent agent that conditions only on local observations restricted to a limited
field of view centred on that unit (see Figure 5). Groups of these agents must be trained to
solve challenging combat scenarios, battling an opposing army under the centralised control
of the game’s built-in scripted AI.
Proper micro of units during battles maximises the damage dealt to enemy units while
minimising damage received, and requires a range of skills. For example, one important
technique is focus fire, i.e., ordering units to jointly attack and kill enemy units one after
another. When focusing fire, it is important to avoid overkill : inflicting more damage to
units than is necessary to kill them. Other common micro techniques include: assembling
units into formations based on their armour types, making enemy units give chase while
maintaining enough distance so that little or no damage is incurred (kiting, Figure 1a),
coordinating the positioning of units to attack from different directions or taking advantage
of the terrain to defeat the enemy.
SMAC thus provides a convenient environment for evaluating the effectiveness of MARL
algorithms. The simulated StarCraft II environment and carefully designed scenarios require
learning rich cooperative behaviours under partial observability, which is a challenging task.
The simulated environment also provides an additional state information during training,
such as information on all the units on the entire map. This is crucial for facilitating
19

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

(a) MMM2

(b) corridor

Figure 6: Screenshots of two SMAC scenarios.
algorithms to take full advantage of the centralised training regime and assessing all aspects
of MARL methods.
SMAC features the following characteristics that are common in many real-word multiagent systems:
• Partial observability: Like, e.g., self-driving cars and autonomous drones, agents in
SMAC receive only limited information about the environment.
• Large number of agents: the scenarios in SMAC include up to 27 learning agents.
• Diversity: many scenarios feature heterogeneous units with resulting diversity in
optimal strategies.
• Long-term planning: defeating the enemy in SMAC often requires the agents to perform
a long sequence of actions.
• High-dimensional observation spaces: the inclusion of diverse units and the large size
of the map yield an immense state space.
• Large per-agent action space: the agents can perform up to 70 actions at each time
step.
• Coordinated teamwork: micromanagement of units requires the individual agents to
execute strictly coordinated actions, which is essential to many MARL problems.
• Stochasticity: the behaviour of the enemy differs across individual runs. Also, the
amount of time that the agents must wait until being able to shoot again is stochastic.
SMAC is one of the first MARL benchmarks that includes all of these features, making it
useful for evaluating the effectiveness of methods for many aspects of learning decentralised
multi-agent control. We hope that it will become a standard benchmark for measuring the
progress and a grand challenge for pushing the boundaries of MARL.
7.1 Scenarios
SMAC consists of a set of StarCraft II micro scenarios which aim to evaluate how well
independent agents are able to learn coordination to solve complex tasks. These scenarios
are carefully designed to necessitate the learning of one or more micro techniques to defeat
the enemy. Each scenario is a confrontation between two armies of units. The initial position,
number, and type of units in each army varies from scenario to scenario, as does the presence
20

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Name

Ally Units

Enemy Units

2s3z
3s5z
1c3s5z
5m vs 6m
10m vs 11m
27m vs 30m
3s5z vs 3s6z
MMM2
2s vs 1sc
3s vs 5z
6h vs 8z
bane vs bane
2c vs 64zg
corridor

2 Stalkers & 3 Zealots
3 Stalkers & 5 Zealots
1 Colossus, 3 Stalkers & 5 Zealots
5 Marines
10 Marines
27 Marines
3 Stalkers & 5 Zealots
1 Medivac, 2 Marauders & 7 Marines
2 Stalkers
3 Stalkers
6 Hydralisks
20 Zerglings & 4 Banelings
2 Colossi
6 Zealots

2 Stalkers & 3 Zealots
3 Stalkers & 5 Zealots
1 Colossus, 3 Stalkers & 5 Zealots
6 Marines
11 Marines
30 Marines
3 Stalkers & 6 Zealots
1 Medivac, 3 Marauders & 8 Marines
1 Spine Crawler
5 Zealots
8 Zealots
20 Zerglings & 4 Banelings
64 Zerglings
24 Zerglings

Table 5: SMAC challenges. Note that list of SMAC scenarios has been updated from the
earlier version. All scenarios, however, are still available in the repository.

or absence of elevated or impassable terrain. Figures 1 and 6 include screenshots of several
SMAC micro scenarios.
The first army is controlled by the learned allied agents. The second army consists of
enemy units controlled by the built-in game AI, which uses carefully handcrafted non-learned
heuristics. At the beginning of each episode, the game AI instructs its units to attack the
allied agents using its scripted strategies. An episode ends when all units of either army
have died or when a pre-specified time limit is reached (in which case the game is counted
as a defeat for the allied agents). The goal is to maximise the win rate, i.e., the ratio of
games won to games played.
The complete list of challenges is presented in Table 5. More specifics on the SMAC
scenarios and environment settings can be found in Appendices D.1 and D.2 respectively.
7.2 State and Observations
At each timestep, agents receive local observations drawn within their field of view. This
encompasses information about the map within a circular area around each unit and with a
radius equal to the sight range (Figure 5). The sight range makes the environment partially
observable from the standpoint of each agent. Agents can only observe other agents if they
are both alive and located within the sight range. Hence, there is no way for agents to
distinguish between teammates that are far away from those that are dead.
The feature vector observed by each agent contains the following attributes for both
allied and enemy units within the sight range: distance, relative x, relative y, health,
shield, and unit type. Shields serve as an additional source of protection that needs to
be removed before any damage can be done to the health of units. All Protoss units have
shields, which can regenerate if no new damage is dealt. In addition, agents have access to
the last actions of allied units that are in the field of view. Lastly, agents can observe the
21

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

terrain features surrounding them, in particular, the values of eight points at a fixed radius
indicating height and walkability.
The global state, which is only available to agents during centralised training, contains
information about all units on the map. Specifically, the state vector includes the coordinates
of all agents relative to the centre of the map, together with unit features present in the
observations. Additionally, the state stores the energy of Medivacs and cooldown of the
rest of the allied units, which represents the minimum delay between attacks. Finally, the
last actions of all agents are attached to the central state.
All features, both in the state as well as in the observations of individual agents, are
normalised by their maximum values. The sight range is set to nine for all agents. The feature
vectors for both local observations and global state have a fixed size, where information
about the ally/enemy is represented as a sequence ordered by the unit ID number.
7.3 Action Space
The discrete set of actions that agents are allowed to take consists of move[direction]3 ,
attack[enemy id], stop and no-op.4 As healer units, Medivacs must use heal[agent id]
actions instead of attack[enemy id]. The maximum number of actions an agent can take
ranges between 7 and 70, depending on the scenario.
To ensure decentralisation of the task, agents can use the attack[enemy id] action only
on enemies in their shooting range (Figure 5). This additionally constrains the ability of the
units to use the built-in attack-move macro-actions on enemies that are far away. We set
the shooting range to six for all agents. Having a larger sight range than a shooting range
forces agents to use move commands before starting to fire.
To ensure that agents only execute valid actions, a mask is provided indicating which
actions are valid and invalid at each timestep.
7.4 Rewards
The overall goal is to maximise the win rate for each battle scenario. The default setting is
to use the shaped reward, which produces a reward based on the hit-point damage dealt and
enemy units killed, together with a special bonus for winning the battle. The exact values
and scales for each of these events can be configured using a range of flags. To produce
fair comparisions we encourage using this default reward function for all scenarios. We also
provide another sparse reward option, in which the reward is +1 for winning and -1 for
losing an episode.
7.5 Evaluation Methodology
To ensure the fairness of the challenge and comparability of results, performance should
be evaluated under standardised conditions. One should not undertake any changes to the
environment used for evaluating the policies. This includes the observation and state spaces,
action space, the game mechanics, and settings of the environment (e.g., frame-skipping
3. Four directions: north, south, east, or west.
4. Dead agents can only take no-op action while live agents cannot.

22

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

rate). One should not modify the StarCraft II map files in any way or change the difficulty
of the game AI. Episode limits of each scenario should also remain unchanged.
SMAC restricts the execution of the trained models to be decentralised, i.e., during
testing each agent must base its policy solely on its own action-observation history and
cannot use the global state or the observations of other agents. It is, however, acceptable
to train the decentralised policies in centralised fashion. Specifically, agents can exchange
individual observations, model parameters and gradients during training as well as make use
of the global state.
7.6 Evaluation Metrics
Our main evaluation metric is the mean win percentage of evaluation episodes as a function
of environment steps observed, over the course of training. Such progress can be estimated
by periodically running a fixed number of evaluation episodes (in practice, 32) with any
exploratory behaviours disabled. Each experiment is repeated using a number of independent
training runs and the resulting plots include the median performance as well as the 25-75%
percentiles. We use five independent runs for this purpose in order to strike a balance
between statistical significance and the computational requirements. We recommend using
the median instead of the mean in order to avoid the effect of any outliers. We report the
number of independent runs, as well as environment steps used in training.
We also include the computational resources used, as well as the wall clock time for
running each experiment. SMAC provides functionality for saving StarCraft II replays,
which can be viewed using a freely available client. The resulting videos can be used to
comment on interesting behaviours observed. Each independent run takes between 8 to 16
hours, depending on the exact scenario, using Nvidia Geforce GTX 1080 Ti graphics cards.

8. PyMARL
To make it easier to develop algorithms for SMAC, we have also open-sourced our software engineering framework PyMARL5 . Compared to many other frameworks for deep
reinforcement learning (Stooke and Abbeel, 2019; Hill et al., 2018; Hoffman et al., 2020),
PyMARL is designed with a focus on the multi-agent setting. It is also intended for fast, easy
development and experimentation for researchers, relying on fewer abstractions than e.g.,
RLLib (Liang et al., 2018). To maintain this lightweight development experience, PyMARL
does not support distributed training.
PyMARL’s codebase is organized in a modular fashion in order to enable the rapid
development of new algorithms, as well as provide implementations of current deep MARL
algorithms to benchmark against. It is built on top of PyTorch to facilitate the fast execution
and training of deep neural networks, and take advantage of the rich ecosystem built around
it. PyMARL’s modularity makes it easy to extend, and components can be readily isolated
for testing purposes.
Since the implementation and development of deep MARL algorithms come with a
number of additional challenges beyond those posed by single-agent deep RL, it is crucial
to have simple and understandable code. In order to improve the readability of code
5. PyMARL is available at https://github.com/oxwhirl/pymarl.

23

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

and simplify the handling of data between components, PyMARL encapsulates all data
stored in the buffer within an easy to use data structure. This encapsulation provides a
cleaner interface for the necessary handling of data in deep MARL algorithms, whilst not
obstructing the manipulation of the underlying PyTorch Tensors. In addition, PyMARL
aims to maximise the batching of data when performing inference or learning so as to provide
significant speed-ups over more naive implementations.
PyMARL features implementations of the following algorithms: QMIX, QTRAN (Son
et al., 2019), COMA (Foerster et al., 2018), VDN (Sunehag et al., 2017), and IQL (Tan,
1993) as baselines.

9. SMAC Results
In this section, we present the results of our experiments of QMIX and other existing
multi-agent RL methods using the new SMAC benchmark.
The evaluation procedure is similar to the one in (Rashid et al., 2018). The training
is paused after every 10000 timesteps during which 32 test episodes are run with agents
performing action selection greedily in a decentralised fashion. The percentage of episodes
where the agents defeat all enemy units within the permitted time limit is referred to as the
test win rate.
The architectures and training details are presented in Appendix D.3. A table of the
results is included in Appendix D.4. Data from the individual runs are available at the
SMAC repository (https://github.com/oxwhirl/smac).

Figure 7: Left: The median test win %, averaged across all 14 scenarios. Heuristic’s
performance is shown as a dotted line. Right: The number of scenarios in which
the algorithm’s median test win % is the highest by at least 1/32 (smoothed).

Figure 7 plots the median test win percentage averaged across all scenarios in order
to compare the algorithms across the entire SMAC suite. We also plot the performance
of a simple heuristic AI that selects the closest enemy unit (ignoring partial observability)
and attacks it with the entire team until it is dead, upon which the next closest enemy
unit is selected. This is a basic form of focus-firing, which is a crucial tactic for achieving
good performance in micromanagement scenarios. The relatively poor performance of the
24

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

heuristic AI shows that the suite of SMAC scenarios requires more complex behaviour than
naively focus-firing the closest enemy, making it an interesting and challenging benchmark.
Overall QMIX achieves the highest test win percentage and is the best performer on
up to eight scenarios during training. Additionally, IQL, VDN, and QMIX all significantly
outperform COMA, demonstrating the sample efficiency of off-policy value-based methods
over on-policy policy gradient methods.

Figure 8: Three scenarios including QTRAN.
We also compare to QTRAN on 3 scenarios in Figure 8. We can see that QTRAN fails
to achieve good performance on 3s5z and takes far longer to reach the performance of VDN
and QMIX on 2s3z. Since it barely beats IQL on relatively easy scenarios, we do not perform
a more comprehensive benchmarking of QTRAN. In preliminary experiments, we found the
QTRAN-Base algorithm slightly more performant and more stable than QTRAN-Alt. For
more details on the hyperparameters and architectures considered, please see the Appendix
D.3.
Based on the overall performances of all algorithms, we broadly group the scenarios into
three categories: Easy, Hard, and Super-Hard.
Figure 9 shows that IQL and COMA struggle even on the Easy scenarios, performing
poorly on four of the five scenarios in this category. This shows the advantage of learning a
centralised but factored centralised Qtot . Even though QMIX exceeds 95% test win rate on
all of five Easy scenarios, they serve an important role in the benchmark as sanity checks
when implementing and testing new algorithms.
The Hard scenarios in Figure 10 each present their own unique problems. 2c vs 64zg
only contains 2 allied agents, but 64 enemy units (the largest in the SMAC benchmark)
making the action space of the agents much larger than the other scenarios. bane vs bane
contains a large number of allied and enemy units, but the results show that IQL easily finds
a winning strategy whereas all other methods struggle and exhibit large variance. 5m vs 6m
is an asymmetric scenario that requires precise control to win consistently, and in which
the best performers (QMIX and VDN) have plateaued in performance. Finally, 3s vs 5z
25

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Figure 9: Easy scenarios. The heuristic AI’s performance shown as a dotted black line.

Figure 10: Hard scenarios. The heuristic AI’s performance shown as a dotted black line.

requires the three allied stalkers to kite the enemy zealots for the majority of the episode
(at least 100 timesteps), which leads to a delayed reward problem.
26

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Figure 11: Super Hard scenarios. The heuristic AI’s performance shown as a dotted black
line.

The scenarios shown in Figure 11 are categorised as Super Hard because of the poor
performance of all algorithms, with only QMIX making meaningful progress on two of the
five. We hypothesise that exploration is a bottleneck in many of these scenarios, providing a
nice testbed for future research in this domain.

10. Analysis
In this section, we aim to understand the reasons why QMIX outperforms VDN in our
experiments. In particular, we consider two possible causes: 1) the inclusion of the central
state in the mixing network and 2) the nonlinearity of the mixing network.
We find that inclusion of the central state is extremely important for performance but
that it alone is not sufficient to explain QMIX’s increased performance. We further find that
the mixing network learns nonlinear functions when required, but achieves good performance
on the SMAC benchmark even when the learned solutions are mostly linear combinations of
the agent’s utilities. Studying this phenomenon further, we conclude that it is the flexibility
of the mixing network’s parameterisation, but not its nonlinearity, that accounts for QMIX’s
superior performance in these tasks.
27

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Our ablation experiments focus on three scenarios, one for each of the three difficulty
categories: 3s5z, 2c vs 64zg, and MMM2. We chose these three scenarios because they exhibit
a large gap in performance between QMIX and VDN, in order to better understand the
contribution of the components in QMIX towards that increased performance.
10.1 Role of the Central State
In order to disentangle the effects of the various components of the QMIX architecture, we
consider the following two ablations:
• VDN-S: The output of VDN is augmented by a state-dependent bias.
• QMIX-NS: The weights of the mixing network are not a function of the state. The
state-dependent bias remains.

Figure 12: Ablations for state experiments.
Figure 12 shows that VDN-S performs better than VDN, but still worse than QMIX,
indicating that inclusion of the state accounts for some but not all of QMIX’s performance.
On the easy 3s5z scenario, QMIX-NS performs very poorly, which is surprising since it is a
strict generalisation of VDN-S. However, on the other two scenarios it outperforms VDN-S,
indicating that the extra flexibility afforded by a learnt mixing over a fixed summation can
be beneficial.
10.2 Role of Nonlinear Mixing
The results in Figure 12 show that both a state dependent bias on VDN (VDN-S) and a
learnt state-independent mixing (QMIX-NS) do not match the performance of QMIX. Thus,
we consider another ablation of QMIX:
• QMIX-Lin: We remove the final layer and nonlinearity of the mixing network, making
it a linear network. The state-dependant bias remains.
28

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Figure 13: Ablations for mixing network linearity experiments.
Figure 13 shows that whilst QMIX-Lin matches QMIX on the easy 3s5z scenario, it
underperforms QMIX on the other two scenarios we considered. This suggests that the
ability to perform a nonlinear mixing, through the inclusion of a nonlinearity and additional
hidden layer in the mixing network, plays an important role QMIX’s performance. To
confirm this, we examine the function the mixing network learns.

Figure 14: The learnt mixing of QMIX on 2c vs 64zg at the end of training for timesteps 0
(left) and 50 (right). Circles indicate the Qtot -values for the discrete joint-action
space.
Figure 14 shows the learnt mixing of the network at the end of training for the 2c vs 64zg
scenario with two agents trained using QMIX. We generated a sample trajectory by greedily
selecting actions and plotted the mixing function at different timesteps. The learnt function is
approximately linear for the vast majority of the timesteps in the agent’s Q-values, similarly
to the first timestep of the episode shown in Figure 14 (left). The only timesteps in which we
observe a noticeable nonlinearity are at the end of the episode (53 timesteps total). When
29

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

trained for longer we still observe that the the mixing function remains linear for the vast
majority of timesteps.

Figure 15: The learnt mixing of QMIX on 3s5z at the end of training for timesteps 0 (left)
and 50 (right), for agents 2 (top) and 7 (bottom).

Figure 15 shows the learnt mixing for 3s5z as a function of a single Qa , keeping the
Q-values for the other agent’s fixed. The mixing network clearly learns an approximately
linear mixing, which is consistent across all timesteps and agents (only timesteps 0 and 50
for agents 2 and 7 are shown since they are representative of all other timesteps and agents).
This is a surprising result. QMIX is certainly capable of learning nonlinear mixing
functions in practice, and thereby outperforming the more restrictive VDN decomposition.
As an example, Figure 16 visualises the learnt mixing function for the didactic two-step
game from section 5, clearly showing how a nonlinear fit allows QMIX to represent the true
optimal value function.
Yet, we observe mostly linear mixing functions in solutions to the SMAC benchmark
tasks. If QMIX is learning a mostly linear mixing, then why does it outperform QMIX-Lin?
One difference is that QMIX’s mixing network is compromised of two fully-connected layers,
rather than the single linear layer of QMIX-Lin. If the nonlinearity is not essential, it may
be that the extra layer in the mixing network is responsible for the performance increase.
To test this hypothesis, we consider another ablation:
• QMIX-2Lin: QMIX, without a nonlinear activation function in the mixing network.
QMIX-2Lin’s mixing network is compromised of two linear layers without any nonlinearity between them. Thus, it can only learn a linear transformation of Qa into Qtot .
30

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Figure 16: The learnt mixing of QMIX on the two-step game from Section 5.

QMIX-Lin’s mixing network is a single linear layer, thus both QMIX-Lin and QMIX-2Lin’s
mixing networks share the same representational capacity. QMIX’s mixing network, on the
other hand, has an ELU non-linearity between its two weight layers and thus can represent
non-linear transformations of Qa to Qtot .
We first consider a simple regression experiment in which the states, agent Q-values,
and targets are randomly generated and fixed. Further details on the regression task are
included in Appendix E.

Figure 17: The loss on a regression task.
31

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

We compare the loss of QMIX (with an ELU non-linearity), QMIX-Lin, and QMIX-2Lin
in Figure 17, which illustrates that QMIX and QMIX-2Lin perform similarly, and both
perform a faster optimisation of the loss than QMIX-Lin. Even though QMIX-Lin and
QMIX-2Lin can both learn only linear mixing functions, their parametrisation of such a
linear function are different. Having an extra layer is a better parametrisation in this scenario
because it allows for gradient descent to optimise the loss faster (Arora et al., 2018).

Figure 18: Ablations for linear experiments.
Figure 18 confirms that the more flexible parameterisation of the mixing network is
largely responsible for the increased performance. However, the results on 2c vs 64zg show
that QMIX performs slightly better than QMIX-2Lin, indicating that in some scenarios
nonlinear mixing can still be beneficial. Figure 14 (right) shows an example of when such a
nonlinearity is learnt on this task.
We also investigate changing the nonlinearity in the mixing network from ELU, which is
largely linear, to Tanh.

Figure 19: The learnt mixing of QMIX on 2c vs 64zg using a tanh nonlinearity at the end
of training for timesteps 0 (left) and 50 (right).
Figures 19 and 20 show the learnt mixings when using a tanh non-linearity. The mixing
network using tanh learns a more nonlinear mixing, especially for 3s5z, than with ELU.
Figure 21 shows how this translates to performance: there are perhaps some small gains in
learning speed for some random seeds when using tanh. However, the effect of an additional
layer (in improving the optimisation dynamics) is much more significant than encouraging a
more non-linear mixing through the choice of nonlinearity.
32

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Figure 20: The learnt mixing of QMIX on 3s5z, using a tanh nonlinearity, at the end of
training for timesteps 0 (left) and 50 (right), for agents 2 (top) and 7 (bottom).

Figure 21: The Median test win % comparing QMIX with an ELU nonlinearity (QMIX)
and QMIX with a tanh nonlinearity in the mixing network (QMIX-Tanh).

10.3 Role of RNN in Agent Network
Finally, we compare the necessity of using an agent’s action-observation history by comparing
the performance of an agent network with and without an RNN in Figure 22. On the easy
scenario of 3s5z we can see that an RNN is not required to use action-observation information
from previous timesteps, but on the harder scenario of 3s vs 5z it is crucial to learning how
to kite effectively.
33

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Figure 22: Comparing agent networks with and without RNNs (QMIX-FF) on two scenarios.

10.4 Role of the COMA Critic Architecture
In addition to the algorithmic differences between QMIX and COMA (QMIX is an off-policy
Q-learning algorithm; COMA is an on-policy actor-critic algorithm), the architecture used
to estimate the relevant Q-values differs. COMA’s critic is a feed-forward network, whereas
QMIX’s architecture for estimating Qtot contains RNNs (the agent networks). The results
of Figure 22 raise the question: To what extent do the architectural differences between
QMIX and COMA affect final performance? To test this, we change the architecture of
the COMA critic to match that of QMIX more closely. Specifically it now consists of
per-agent components with the same architecture and inputs as the agent networks used
by QMIX, which feed Qa values for their chosen action into a mixing network. Since there
is no requirement for monotonicity in this mixing network, we simplify its architecture
significantly to a feed-forward network with ReLU non-linearities and two hidden layers of
128 units. We test two variants of the mixing network, one with access to the state and
one without. The former takes the state as input in addition to the agent’s chosen action
Qa -values. The output of the mixing network is |U | units, and we mask out the Qa -value
for the agent whose Q-values are being produced.

Figure 23: Comparing the different architectures for the COMA critic without the state, on
two scenarios.

Figures 23 and 24 show that the architectural change has little effect on the performance
of COMA, with the addition of the state actually degrading performance in 2s3z.
34

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Figure 24: Comparing the different architectures for the COMA critic with the state on two
scenarios.

10.5 Role of Network Size and Depth
Another architectural consideration is the overall size of the network used to estimate Qtot
for VDN and VDN-S. Since QMIX has an additional mixing network, the overall architecture
is deeper during training. In order to understand the effect of this depth on performance,
we consider the following variants of VDN and VDN-S.
• VDN Wider: We increase the size of the agent’s hidden layer from 64 to 128.
• VDN Deeper: We add an additional layer to the agent network after the GRU, with
a ReLU non-linearity.
• VDN-S Bigger: We increase the size of the state-dependent bias to 2 hidden layers
of 64 units.
In our other experiments, we have used the same agent networks for each method, to
ensure a fair comparison of the performance of the decentralised policies. By increasing the
capacity of the agent networks for VDN Wider and VDN Deeper, we are now using larger
agent networks than all other methods. In this sense, the comparisons to these variants are
no longer fair. Figure 25 shows the results for VDN Wider and VDN Deeper. As expected,
increasing the capacity of the agent networks increases performance. In particular, increasing
the depth results in a large performance increase on the challenging MMM2. However,
despite the larger agent networks, VDN Wider and VDN Deeper still do not match the
performance of QMIX with smaller, less expressive agent networks. Figure 26 shows the
results for VDN-S Bigger, in which we increase the size of the state-dependent bias. The
results show that this has a minimal impact on performance over VDN-S.

11. Conclusion
This article presented QMIX, a deep multi-agent RL method that allows end-to-end learning
of decentralised policies in a centralised setting and makes efficient use of extra state
information. QMIX allows the learning of a rich joint action-value function, which admits
tractable decompositions into per-agent action-value functions. This is achieved by imposing
a monotonicity constraint on the mixing network.
35

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Figure 25: Comparing larger agent networks for VDN.

Figure 26: Comparing a larger state-dependent bias for VDN-S.
To evaluate QMIX and other multi-agent RL algorithms, we introduced SMAC as a set
of benchmark problems for cooperative multi-agent RL. SMAC focuses on decentralised
micromanagement tasks and features 14 diverse combat scenarios which challenge MARL
methods to handle partial observability and high-dimensional inputs. Additionally, we
open-source PyMARL, a framework for cooperative deep MARL algorithms that features
implementations of IQL, VDN, QMIX, QTRAN and COMA.
Our results on SMAC show that QMIX improves the final performance over other relevant
deep multi-agent RL algorithms, most notably VDN. We include a detailed analysis through
a series of ablations and visualisations for why QMIX outperforms VDN, showing that
two components of QMIX are crucial to the performance the algorithm: a state-dependent
36

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

bias and a learnt mixing of the agent’s utilities into Qtot that is conditioned on the state.
Through our analysis, we found that the learnt mixing need only be linear to recover the
majority of QMIX’s performance, but that the parametrisation for this linear function is an
important consideration.
In the future, we aim to extend SMAC with new challenging scenarios that feature a more
diverse set of units and require a higher level of coordination amongst agents. Particularly,
we plan to make use of the rich skill set of StarCraft II units, and host scenarios that require
the agents to utilise the features of the terrain. With harder multi-agent coordination
problems, we aim to explore the gaps in existing multi-agent RL approaches and motivate
further research in this domain.
There are several interesting avenues for future research:
• Investigating the performance gap between value-based methods and policy-based
methods. In our experiments, QMIX (and VDN) significantly outperform COMA in
all scenarios, both in terms of sample efficiency and final performance. The primary
differences between the methods are the use of Q-learning vs the Policy Gradient
theorem, use of off-policy data from the replay buffer and the architecture used to
estimate the joint-action Q-Values.
• Expanding upon the joint-action Q-values representable by QMIX, to allow for the
representation of coordinated behaviour. Importantly, this must scale gracefully to
the deep RL setting.
• Better algorithms for multi-agent exploration that go beyond -greedy. There have been
many advances with regards to exploration in single-agent RL, dealing with both sparse
and dense rewards environments. Taking inspiration from these, or developing entirely
new approaches that improve exploration in a cooperative multi-agent RL setting is
an important problem. SMAC’s super-hard scenarios provide a nice benchmark for
evaluating these advances.

Acknowledgments
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement number
637713). It was also supported by the Oxford-Google DeepMind Graduate Scholarship, the
UK EPSRC CDT in Autonomous Intelligent Machines and Systems, Chevening Scholarship,
Luys Scholarship and an EPSRC grant (EP/M508111/1, EP/N509711/1). This work is
linked to and partly funded by the project Free the Drones (FreeD) under the Innovation
Fund Denmark and Microsoft. The experiments were made possible by a generous equipment
grant from NVIDIA.
We would like to thank Frans Oliehoek and Wendelin Boehmer for helpful comments
and discussion. We also thank Oriol Vinyals, Kevin Calderone, and the rest of the SC2LE
team at DeepMind and Blizzard for their work on the interface.
37

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

References
Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Noah Golowich, and Wei Hu. A convergence analysis of
gradient descent for deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02281, 2018.
Nolan Bard, Jakob N. Foerster, Sarath Chandar, Neil Burch, Marc Lanctot, H. Francis Song,
Emilio Parisotto, Vincent Dumoulin, Subhodeep Moitra, Edward Hughes, Iain Dunning,
Shibl Mourad, Hugo Larochelle, Marc G. Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. The hanabi
challenge: A new frontier for ai research. Artificial Intelligence, 280:103216, 2020.
M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade learning environment:
An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:
253–279, jun 2013.
Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning-Volume 70, pages 449–458. JMLR. org, 2017.
Lucian Busoniu, Robert Babuska, and Bart De Schutter. A Comprehensive Survey of Multiagent Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part C (Applications and Reviews), 38(2):156–172, 2008.
Wendelin Bhmer, Vitaly Kurin, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep Coordination Graphs.
arXiv:1910.00091 [cs], September 2019. arXiv: 1910.00091.
Yongcan Cao, Wenwu Yu, Wei Ren, and Guanrong Chen. An Overview of Recent Progress
in the Study of Distributed Multi-agent Coordination. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, 9(1):427–438, 2012.
Jacopo Castellini, Frans A Oliehoek, Rahul Savani, and Shimon Whiteson. The representational capacity of action-value networks for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pages 1862–1864. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, 2019.
Yong Chen, Ming Zhou, Ying Wen, Yaodong Yang, Yufeng Su, Weinan Zhang, Dell Zhang,
Jun Wang, and Han Liu. Factorized Q-Learning for Large-Scale Multi-Agent Systems.
arXiv:1809.03738 [cs], September 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.03738. arXiv:
1809.03738.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. In NIPS 2014 Workshop
on Deep Learning, 2014.
Yali Du, Lei Han, Meng Fang, Ji Liu, Tianhong Dai, and Dacheng Tao. LIIR: Learning
individual intrinsic reward in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 32, pages 4405–4416. 2019.
38

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Charles Dugas, Yoshua Bengio, Franois Blisle, Claude Nadeau, and Ren Garcia. Incorporating
functional knowledge in neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10:
1239–1262, 2009.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you
need: Learning skills without a reward function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070, 2018.
Jakob Foerster, Yannis M Assael, Nando de Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning
to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 2137–2145, 2016.
Jakob Foerster, Nantas Nardelli, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Philip H. S.
Torr, Pushmeet Kohli, and Shimon Whiteson. Stabilising Experience Replay for Deep
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of The 34th International Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 1146–1155, 2017.
Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon
Whiteson. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
Haotian Fu, Hongyao Tang, Jianye Hao, Zihan Lei, Yingfeng Chen, and Changjie Fan. Deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning with discrete-continuous hybrid action spaces. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1903.04959, 2019.
Carlos Guestrin, Daphne Koller, and Ronald Parr. Multiagent Planning with Factored
MDPs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1523–1530. MIT
Press, 2002.
Jayesh K. Gupta, Maxim Egorov, and Mykel Kochenderfer. Cooperative Multi-agent Control
Using Deep Reinforcement Learning. In Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
pages 66–83. Springer, 2017.
David Ha, Andrew Dai, and Quoc V. Le. HyperNetworks. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Matthew Hausknecht and Peter Stone. Deep Recurrent Q-Learning for Partially Observable
MDPs. In AAAI Fall Symposium on Sequential Decision Making for Intelligent Agents,
2015.
Johannes Heinrich and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning from self-play in imperfectinformation games. CoRR, abs/1603.01121, 2016.
Ashley Hill, Antonin Raffin, Maximilian Ernestus, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Rene
Traore, Prafulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Radford, John Schulman, Szymon Sidor, and Yuhuai Wu. Stable baselines.
https://github.com/hill-a/stable-baselines, 2018.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9
(8):1735–1780, 1997.
39

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Matt Hoffman, Bobak Shahriari, John Aslanides, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Feryal Behbahani,
Tamara Norman, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Albin Cassirer, Fan Yang, Kate Baumli, Sarah Henderson, Alex Novikov, Sergio Gmez Colmenarejo, Serkan Cabi, Caglar Gulcehre, Tom Le
Paine, Andrew Cowie, Ziyu Wang, Bilal Piot, and Nando de Freitas. Acme: A research
framework for distributed reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.00979, 2020.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.00979.
Maximilian Hüttenrauch, Adrian Šošić, and Gerhard Neumann. Guided Deep Reinforcement
Learning for Swarm Systems. In AAMAS 2017 Autonomous Robots and Multirobot Systems
(ARMS) Workshop, 2017.
Maximilian Httenrauch, Adrian oi, and Gerhard Neumann. Deep Reinforcement Learning
for Swarm Systems. arXiv:1807.06613 [cs, stat], July 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1807.06613. arXiv: 1807.06613.
Shariq Iqbal and Fei Sha. Actor-Attention-Critic for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning.
arXiv:1810.02912 [cs, stat], October 2018. arXiv: 1810.02912.
Emilio Jorge, Mikael Kågebäck, and Emil Gustavsson. Learning to play guess who? and
inventing a grounded language as a consequence. In NIPS 2016 Workshop on Deep
Reinforcement Learning, 2016.
Jelle R. Kok and Nikos Vlassis. Collaborative Multiagent Reinforcement Learning by Payoff
Propagation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7:1789–1828, 2006.
Landon Kraemer and Bikramjit Banerjee. Multi-agent reinforcement learning as a rehearsal
for decentralized planning. Neurocomputing, 190:82–94, 2016.
Martin Lauer and Martin Riedmiller. An algorithm for distributed reinforcement learning
in cooperative multi-agent systems. In In Proceedings of the Seventeenth International
Conference on Machine Learning. Citeseer, 2000.
Joel Z Leibo, Vinicius Zambaldi, Marc Lanctot, Janusz Marecki, and Thore Graepel. Multiagent reinforcement learning in sequential social dilemmas. In Proceedings of the 16th
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pages 464–473, 2017.
Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Ken Goldberg,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. RLlib: Abstractions for distributed
reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Alex Tong Lin, Mark J Debord, Katia Estabridis, Gary Hewer, and Stanley Osher. Cesma:
Centralized expert supervises multi-agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.02311, 2019.
Yong Liu, Yujing Hu, Yang Gao, Yingfeng Chen, and Changjie Fan. Value function transfer
for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning based on n-step returns. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 457–463,
2019.
40

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch.
Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 6382–6393, 2017.
Xueguang Lu and Christopher Amato. Decentralized likelihood quantile networks for
improving performance in deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.06319v4, 2019.
Anuj Mahajan, Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, and Shimon Whiteson. MAVEN: MultiAgent Variational Exploration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32,
pages 7611–7622. 2019.
Aleksandra Malysheva, Tegg Taekyong Sung, Chae-Bong Sohn, Daniel Kudenko, and
Aleksei Shpilman. Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Relevance Graphs.
arXiv:1811.12557 [cs], November 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.12557. arXiv:
1811.12557.
Laëtitia Matignon, Guillaume J Laurent, and Nadine Le Fort-Piat. Hysteretic q-learning:
an algorithm for decentralized reinforcement learning in cooperative multi-agent teams.
In 2007 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages
64–69. IEEE, 2007.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G
Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, and
others. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):
529–533, 2015.
Frans A. Oliehoek and Christopher Amato. A Concise Introduction to Decentralized POMDPs.
SpringerBriefs in Intelligent Systems. Springer, 2016.
Frans A. Oliehoek, Matthijs T. J. Spaan, and Nikos Vlassis. Optimal and Approximate
Q-value Functions for Decentralized POMDPs. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
32(1):289–353, 2008.
Shayegan Omidshafiei, Jason Pazis, Christopher Amato, Jonathan P. How, and John Vian.
Deep Decentralized Multi-task Multi-Agent RL under Partial Observability. In Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2681–2690, 2017.
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration
via bootstrapped dqn. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
4026–4034, 2016.
Simon Pageaud, Vronique Deslandres, Vassilissa Lehoux, and Salima Hassas. Multiagent
Learning and Coordination with Clustered Deep Q-Network. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, AAMAS ’19,
pages 2156–2158, Richland, SC, 2019. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems.
41

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Gregory Palmer, Karl Tuyls, Daan Bloembergen, and Rahul Savani. Lenient multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pages 443–451. International Foundation
for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2018.
Gregory Palmer, Rahul Savani, and Karl Tuyls. Negative Update Intervals in Deep MultiAgent Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, AAMAS ’19, pages 43–51, Richland,
SC, 2019. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
event-place: Montreal QC, Canada.
Liviu Panait, Karl Tuyls, and Sean Luke. Theoretical advantages of lenient learners: An
evolutionary game theoretic perspective. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9(Mar):
423–457, 2008.
Peng Peng, Ying Wen, Yaodong Yang, Quan Yuan, Zhenkun Tang, Haitao Long, and Jun
Wang. Multiagent Bidirectionally-Coordinated Nets: Emergence of Human-level Coordination in Learning to Play StarCraft Combat Games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10069,
2017.
Allan Pinkus. Approximation theory of the mlp model in neural networks. Acta numerica,
8:143–195, 1999.
Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn
Powell, Jonas Schneider, Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, Vikash Kumar, and
Wojciech Zaremba. Multi-goal reinforcement learning: Challenging robotics environments
and request for research, 2018.
Neil Rabinowitz, Frank Perbet, Francis Song, Chiyuan Zhang, SM Ali Eslami, and Matthew
Botvinick. Machine theory of mind. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 4218–4227, 2018.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob
Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. QMIX: Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 4295–4304. PMLR 80, 2018.
Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas
Nardelli, Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon
Whiteson. The StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge. In Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pages 2186–2188, 2019.
Christian Schroeder de Witt and Thomas Hornigold. Stratospheric Aerosol Injection as a
Deep Reinforcement Learning Problem. arXiv:1905.07366 [physics, stat], May 2019. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.07366. arXiv: 1905.07366.
Christian Schroeder de Witt, Bei Peng, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip Torr, Wendelin Bhmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for
Decentralized Continuous Cooperative Control. arXiv:2003.06709 [cs, stat], June 2020.
42

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Christian A. Schroeder de Witt, Jakob N. Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Philip H. S. Torr,
Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Multi-Agent Common Knowledge Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1810.11702 [cs], October 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.
11702. arXiv: 1810.11702.
Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. QTRAN:
Learning to Factorize with Transformation for Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning. arXiv:1905.05408 [cs, stat], May 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.
05408. arXiv: 1905.05408.
Peter Stone, Gregory Kuhlmann, Matthew E Taylor, and Yaxin Liu. Keepaway soccer:
From machine learning testbed to benchmark. In Robot Soccer World Cup, pages 93–105.
Springer, 2005.
Adam Stooke and Pieter Abbeel. rlpyt: A research code base for deep reinforcement learning
in pytorch. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01500, 2019.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Learning multiagent communication
with backpropagation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, pages
2244–2252, 2016.
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinicius Zambaldi, Max Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z. Leibo, Karl Tuyls, and
Thore Graepel. Value-Decomposition Networks For Cooperative Multi-Agent Learning Based On Team Reward. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2017.
Gabriel Synnaeve, Nantas Nardelli, Alex Auvolat, Soumith Chintala, Timothe Lacroix,
Zeming Lin, Florian Richoux, and Nicolas Usunier. TorchCraft: a Library for Machine
Learning Research on Real-Time Strategy Games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00625, 2016.
Ardi Tampuu, Tambet Matiisen, Dorian Kodelja, Ilya Kuzovkin, Kristjan Korjus, Juhan
Aru, Jaan Aru, and Raul Vicente. Multiagent cooperation and competition with deep
reinforcement learning. PloS one, 2017.
Ming Tan. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 330–337,
1993.
Blizzard Entertainment.
New
blizzard
custom
game:
Starcraft
master.
http://us.battle.net/sc2/en/blog/4544189/
new-blizzard-custom-game-starcraft-master-3-1-2012, 2012. Accessed: 2018-1116.
Nicolas Usunier, Gabriel Synnaeve, Zeming Lin, and Soumith Chintala. Episodic Exploration
for Deep Deterministic Policies: An Application to StarCraft Micromanagement Tasks. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double
q-learning. In Thirtieth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2016.
43

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Oriol Vinyals, Timo Ewalds, Sergey Bartunov, Petko Georgiev, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets,
Michelle Yeo, Alireza Makhzani, Heinrich Küttler, John Agapiou, Julian Schrittwieser,
John Quan, Stephen Gaffney, Stig Petersen, Karen Simonyan, Tom Schaul, Hado van
Hasselt, David Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Kevin Calderone, Paul Keet, Anthony Brunasso,
David Lawrence, Anders Ekermo, Jacob Repp, and Rodney Tsing. StarCraft II: A New
Challenge for Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04782, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik,
Junyoung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al.
Grandmaster level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575
(7782):350–354, 2019.
Tonghan Wang, Jianhao Wang, Chongyi Zheng, and Chongjie Zhang. Learning nearly
decomposable value functions via communication minimization. 2019a.
Weixun Wang, Tianpei Yang, Yong Liu, Jianye Hao, Xiaotian Hao, Yujing Hu, Yingfeng
Chen, Changjie Fan, and Yang Gao. Action semantics network: Considering the effects of
actions in multiagent systems. 2019b.
Weixun Wang, Tianpei Yang, Yong Liu, Jianye Hao, Xiaotian Hao, Yujing Hu, Yingfeng
Chen, Changjie Fan, and Yang Gao. From few to more: Large-scale dynamic multiagent
curriculum learning. 2019c.
Christopher Watkins. Learning from delayed rewards. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge
England, 1989.
Ermo Wei and Sean Luke. Lenient learning in independent-learner stochastic cooperative
games. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):2914–2955, 2016.
Erfu Yang and Dongbing Gu. Multiagent reinforcement learning for multi-robot systems: A
survey. Technical report, 2004.
Jiachen Yang, Igor Borovikov, and Hongyuan Zha. Hierarchical cooperative multi-agent
reinforcement learning with skill discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03558, 2019.
Yaodong Yang, Rui Luo, Minne Li, Ming Zhou, Weinan Zhang, and Jun Wang. Mean field
multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05438, 2018.
Xinghu Yao, Chao Wen, Yuhui Wang, and Xiaoyang Tan. SMIX($\lambda$): Enhancing
centralized value functions for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. 2019.
Sai Qian Zhang, Qi Zhang, and Jieyu Lin. Efficient communication in multi-agent reinforcement learning via variance based control. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 3230–3239, 2019.
Yuhang Zhao and Xiujun Ma. Learning Efficient Communication in Cooperative Multi-Agent
Environment. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and MultiAgent Systems, pages 2321–2323, Richland, SC, 2019. International Foundation
for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
44

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Lianmin Zheng, Jiacheng Yang, Han Cai, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. Magent:
A many-agent reinforcement learning platform for artificial collective intelligence. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1712.00600, 2017.

45

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Appendix A. Monotonicity
tot
Theorem 2 If ∀a ∈ A ≡ {1, 2, ..., n}, ∂Q
∂Qa ≥ 0 then


argmaxu1 Q1 (τ 1 , u1 )


..
argmax Qtot (τ , u) = 
.
.
u
n
n
argmaxun Qn (τ , u )

1
n
tot
Proof Since ∂Q
∂Qa ≥ 0 for ∀a ∈ A, the following holds for any (u , . . . , u ) and the mixing
network function Qtot (·) with n arguments:

Qtot (Q1 (τ 1 , u1 ), . . . , Qa (τ a , ua ), . . . , Qn (τ n , un ))
≤ Qtot (max Q1 (τ 1 , u1 ), . . . , Qa (τ a , ua ), . . . , Qn (τ n , un ))
u1

...
≤ Qtot (max Q1 (τ 1 , u1 ), . . . , max
Qa (τ a , ua ), . . . , Qn (τ n , un ))
a
u

u1

...
≤ Qtot (max Q1 (τ 1 , u1 ), . . . , max
Qa (τ a , ua ), . . . , max
Qn (τ n , un )).
a
n
u

u1

u

Therefore, the maximiser of the mixing network function is:
(max Q1 (τ 1 , u1 ), . . . , max
Qa (τ a , ua ), . . . , max
Qn (τ n , un )).
a
n
u

u

max

Qtot (Q1 (τ 1 , u1 ), . . . , Qn (τ n , un ))

u1

Thus,
max Qtot (τ , u) :=
u

u=(u1 ,...,un )

= Qtot (max Q1 (τ 1 , u1 ), . . . , max
Qn (τ n , un )).
n
u

u1


argmaxu1 Q1 (τ 1 , u1 )


..
Letting u∗ = (u1∗ , . . . , un∗ ) = 
, we have that:
.
n
n
argmaxun Qn (τ , u )


Qtot (Q1 (τ 1 , u1∗ ), . . . , Qn (τ n , un∗ )) = Qtot (max Q1 (τ 1 , u1 ), . . . , max
Qn (τ n , un ))
n
u1

u

= max Qtot (τ , u)
u

Hence, u∗ = argmaxu Qtot (τ , u), which proves (4).

Appendix B. Two Step Game
B.1 Architecture and Training
The architecture of all agent networks is a DQN with a single hidden layer comprised of 64
units with a ReLU nonlinearity. Each agent performs independent  greedy action selection,
46

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

with  = 1. We set γ = 0.99. The replay buffer consists of the last 500 episodes, from which
we uniformly sample a batch of size 32 for training. The target network is updated every
100 episodes. The learning rate for RMSprop is set to 5 × 10−4 . We train for 10k timesteps.
The size of the mixing network is 8 units. All agent networks share parameters, thus the
agent id is concatenated onto each agent’s observations. We do not pass the last action
taken to the agent as input. Each agent receives the full state as input.
Each state is one-hot encoded. The starting state for the first timestep is State 1. If
Agent 1 takes Action A, it transitions to State 2 (whose payoff matrix is all 7s). If agent 1
takes Action B in the first timestep, it transitions to State 3.
B.2 Learned Value Functions
The learned value functions for the different methods on the Two Step Game are shown in
Tables 6 and 7.
State 1

State 2A

State 2B

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

6.94

6.94

6.99

7.02

-1.87

2.31

B

6.35

6.36

6.99

7.02

2.33

6.51

A

B

A

B

A

B

(b) A

6.93

6.93

7.00

7.00

0.00

1.00

B

7.92

7.92

7.00

7.00

1.00

8.00

A

B

A

B

A

B

(c) A

6.94

6.93

7.03

7.02

0.00

1.01

B

7.93

7.92

7.02

7.01

1.01

8.02

(a)

A

B

A

B

A

B

(d) A

6.98

6.97

7.01

7.02

-1.39

2.57

B

6.37

6.36

7.02

7.04

2.67

6.58

A

B

A

B

A

B

(e) A

6.95

6.99

6.99

7.06

-1.21

2.73

B

6.18

6.22

7.01

7.09

2.46

6.40

Table 6: Qtot on the 2 step game for (a) VDN, (b) QMIX, (c) QMIX-NS, (d) QMIX-Lin
and (e) VDN-S

47

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

Agent 1

Agent 2

A

B

A

B

A

B

6.96

4.47

6.98

7.00

0.50

4.50

A

B

A

B

A

B

5.70

5.78

7.00

7.02

0.50

4.47

Table 7: Qa for IQL on the 2 step game
B.3 Results
Figure 27 shows the loss for the different methods. Table 8 shows the final testing reward
for each method.

Figure 27: Loss for all six methods on the Two Step Game. The mean and 95% confidence
interval is shown across 30 independent runs.

IQL

VDN

VDN-S

QMIX

QMIX-Lin

QMIX-NS

7

7

7

8

7

8

Table 8: The final Test Reward acheived.

Appendix C. Random Matrix Games
C.1 Architecture and Training
The architecture of all agent networks is a DQN with 2 hidden layers comprised of 64 units
with a ReLU nonlinearity. Each agent performs independent  greedy action selection, with
 = 1. The replay buffer consists of the last 500 episodes, from which we uniformly sample a
batch of size 32 for training. The target network is updated every 100 episodes. The learning
rate for RMSprop is set to 5 × 10−4 . We train for 20k timesteps. The mixing network is
identical to the SMAC experiments. All agent networks share parameters, thus the agent id
is concatenated onto each agent’s observations. We do not pass the last action taken to the
agent as input. Each agent receives the full state (a vector of 1s with dimension 5) as input.
48

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Appendix D. SMAC
D.1 Scenarios
Perhaps the simplest scenarios are symmetric battle scenarios, where the two armies are
composed of the same units. Such challenges are particularly interesting when some of the
units are extremely effective against others (this is known as countering), for example, by
dealing bonus damage to a particular armour type. In such a setting, allied agents must
deduce this property of the game and design an intelligent strategy to protect teammates
vulnerable to certain enemy attacks.
SMAC also includes more challenging scenarios, for example, in which the enemy army
outnumbers the allied army by one or more units. In such asymmetric scenarios it is
essential to consider the health of enemy units in order to effectively target the desired
opponent.
Lastly, SMAC offers a set of interesting micro-trick challenges that require a higher-level
of cooperation and a specific micro trick to defeat the enemy. An example of such scenario
is the corridor scenario (Figure 6d). Here, six friendly Zealots face 24 enemy Zerglings,
which requires agents to make effective use of the terrain features. Specifically, agents should
collectively wall off the choke point (the narrow region of the map) to block enemy attacks
from different directions. The 3s vs 5z scenario features three allied Stalkers against five
enemy Zealots (Figure 1a). Since Zealots counter Stalkers, the only winning strategy for the
allied units is to kite the enemy around the map and kill them one after another. Some of
the micro-trick challenges are inspired by StarCraft Master challenge missions released by
Blizzard (Blizzard Entertainment, 2012).
D.2 Environment Setting
SMAC makes use of the StarCraft II Learning Environment (SC2LE ) (Vinyals et al., 2017)
to communicate with the StarCraft II engine. SC2LE provides full control of the game by
making it possible to send commands and receive observations from the game. However,
SMAC is conceptually different from the RL environment of SC2LE. The goal of SC2LE is to
learn to play the full game of StarCraft II. This is a competitive task where a centralised RL
agent receives RGB pixels as input and performs both macro and micro with the player-level
control similar to human players. SMAC, on the other hand, represents a set of cooperative
multi-agent micro challenges where each learning agent controls a single military unit.
SMAC uses the raw API of SC2LE. Raw API observations do not have any graphical
component and include information about the units on the map such as health, location
coordinates, etc. The raw API also allows sending action commands to individual units
using their unit IDs. This setting differs from how humans play the actual game, but is
convenient for designing decentralised multi-agent learning tasks.
Furthermore, to encourage agents to explore interesting micro strategies themselves, we
limit the influence of the StarCraft AI on our agents. In the game of StarCraft II, whenever
an idle unit is under attack, it automatically starts a reply attack towards the attacking
enemy units without being explicitly ordered. We disable such automatic replies towards
the enemy attacks or enemy units that are located closely by creating new units that are the
exact copies of existing ones with two attributes modified: Combat: Default Acquire Level is
49

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

set to Passive (default Offensive) and Behaviour: Response is set to No Response (default
Acquire). These fields are only modified for allied units; enemy units are unchanged.
The sight and shooting range values might differ from the built-in sight or range attribute
of some StarCraft II units. Our goal is not to master the original full StarCraft II game, but
rather to benchmark MARL methods for decentralised control.
The game AI is set to level 7, very difficult. Our experiments, however, suggest that this
setting does significantly impact the unit micromanagement of the built-in heuristics.
D.3 Architecture and Training
The architecture of all agent networks is a DRQN with a recurrent layer comprised of a
GRU with a 64-dimensional hidden state, with a fully-connected layer before and after.
Exploration is performed during training using independent -greedy action selection, where
each agent a performs -greedy action selection over its own Qa . Throughout the training,
we anneal  linearly from 1.0 to 0.05 over 50k time steps and keep it constant for the rest
of the learning. We set γ = 0.99 for all experiments. The replay buffer contains the most
recent 5000 episodes. We sample batches of 32 episodes uniformly from the replay buffer,
and train on fully unrolled episodes, performing a single gradient descent step after every
episode. The target networks are updated after every 200 training episodes. The Double
Q-Learning update rule from (Van Hasselt et al., 2016) is used for all Q-Learning variants
(IQL, VDN, QMIX and QTRAN).
To speed up the learning, we share the parameters of the agent networks across all
agents. Because of this, a one-hot encoding of the agent id is concatenated onto each
agent’s observations. All neural networks are trained using RMSprop6 with learning rate
5 × 10−4 .
The mixing network consists of a single hidden layer of 32 units, utilising an ELU
non-linearity. The hypernetworks consist of a feedforward network with a single hidden layer
of 64 units with a ReLU non-linearity. The output of the hypernetwork is passed through an
absolute function (to acheive non-negativity) and then resized into a matrix of appropriate
size.
The architecture of the COMA critic is a feedforward fully-connected neural network
with the first 2 layers having 128 units, followed by a final layer of |U | units. We set λ = 0.8.
We utilise the same -floor scheme as in (Foerster et al., 2018) for the agents policies, linearlly
annealing  from 0.5 to 0.01 over 100k timesteps. For COMA we roll-out 8 episodes and
train on those episodes. The critic is first updated, performing a gradient descent step for
each timestep in the episode, starting with the final timestep. Then the agent policies are
updated by a single gradient descent step on the data from all 8 episodes.
The architecture of the centralised Q for QTRAN is similar to the one used in (Son et al.,
2019). The agent’s hidden states (64 units) are concatenated with their chosen action (|U |
units) and passed through a feedforward network with a single hidden layer and a ReLU
non-linearity to produce an agent-action embedding (64 + |U | units). The network is shared
across all agents. The embeddings are summed across all agents. The concatentation of the
state and the sum of the embeddings is then passed into the Q network. The Q network
consists of 2 hidden layers with ReLU non-linearities with 64 units each. The V network
6. We set α = 0.99 and do not use weight decay or momentum.

50

Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

takes the state as input and consists of 2 hidden layers with ReLU non-linearities with 64
units each. We set λopt = 1 and λnopt min = 0.1.
We also compared a COMA style architecture in which the input to Q is the state and
the joint-actions encoded as one-hot vectors. For both architectural variants we also tested
having 3 hidden layers. For both network sizes and architectural variants we performed a
hyperparameter search over λopt = 1 and λnopt min ∈ {0.1, 1, 10} on all three of the scenarios
we tested QTRAN on and picked the best performer out of all configurations.
VDN-S uses a state-dependent bias that has the same architecture as the final bias in
QMIX’s mixing network, a single hidden layer of 64 units with a ReLU non-linearity. VDN-S
Bigger uses 2 hidden layers of 64 units instead.
D.4 Table of Results
Table D.4 shows the final median performance (maximum median across the testing intervals
within the last 250k of training) of the algorithms tested. The mean test win %, across 1000
episodes, for the heuristic-based ai is also shown.
IQL

COMA

VDN

QMIX

Heuristic

2s vs 1sc

100

98

100

100

0

2s3z

75

43

97

99

90

3s5z

10

1

84

97

42

1c3s5z

21

31

91

97

81

10m vs 11m

34

7

97

97

12

2c vs 64zg

7

0

21

58

0

bane vs bane

99

64

94

85

43

5m vs 6m

49

1

70

70

0

3s vs 5z

45

0

91

87

0

3s5z vs 3s6z

0

0

2

2

0

6h vs 8z

0

0

0

3

0

27m vs 30m

0

0

0

49

0

MMM2

0

0

1

69

0

corridor

0

0

0

1

0

Table 9: The Test Win Rate % of the various algorithms.

Appendix E. Regression Experiment
For the regression experiment we simulate a task with 4 agents. There are 10 states, of
dimensionality 10, in which each dimension is uniformly sampled from [−1, 1]. For each of
the 10 states, the agent Q-values are uniformly sampled from [−1, 1]. The Qtot targets for
51

Rashid, Samvelyan, Schroeder de Witt, Farquhar, Foerster, Whiteson

each state are uniformly sampled from [0, 10]. The agent Q-values, targets and states are
kept fixed, only the parameters of the mixing network may change.
We use a mixing embed dimension of 32, and train for a total of 2000 timesteps. At each
timestep we uniformly sample a state, add it to the replay buffer of size 200, and execute
a training step. Each training step consists of sampling a minibatch of 32 from the replay
buffer and minimising the L2 loss between the Qtot targets and the network’s outputs.

52

