Counterfactual Multi-Agent Policy Gradients
Jakob N. Foerster1,†

Gregory Farquhar1,†

jakob.foerster@cs.ox.ac.uk

gregory.farquhar@cs.ox.ac.uk

Triantafyllos Afouras1

Nantas Nardelli1

Shimon Whiteson1

afourast@robots.ox.ac.uk

nantas@robots.ox.ac.uk

shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

arXiv:1705.08926v3 [cs.AI] 11 Dec 2024

1

University of Oxford, United Kingdom

Abstract
Many real-world problems, such as network packet routing
and the coordination of autonomous vehicles, are naturally
modelled as cooperative multi-agent systems. There is a great
need for new reinforcement learning methods that can efficiently learn decentralised policies for such systems. To
this end, we propose a new multi-agent actor-critic method
called counterfactual multi-agent (COMA) policy gradients.
COMA uses a centralised critic to estimate the Q-function
and decentralised actors to optimise the agents’ policies. In
addition, to address the challenges of multi-agent credit assignment, it uses a counterfactual baseline that marginalises
out a single agent’s action, while keeping the other agents’
actions fixed. COMA also uses a critic representation that allows the counterfactual baseline to be computed efficiently in
a single forward pass. We evaluate COMA in the testbed of
StarCraft unit micromanagement, using a decentralised variant with significant partial observability. COMA significantly
improves average performance over other multi-agent actorcritic methods in this setting, and the best performing agents
are competitive with state-of-the-art centralised controllers
that get access to the full state.

1

Introduction

Many complex reinforcement learning (RL) problems such
as the coordination of autonomous vehicles (Cao et al.
2013), network packet delivery (Ye, Zhang, and Yang 2015),
and distributed logistics (Ying and Dayong 2005) are naturally modelled as cooperative multi-agent systems. However, RL methods designed for single agents typically fare
poorly on such tasks, since the joint action space of the
agents grows exponentially with the number of agents.
To cope with such complexity, it is often necessary to resort to decentralised policies, in which each agent selects its
own action conditioned only on its local action-observation
history. Furthermore, partial observability and communication constraints during execution may necessitate the use of
decentralised policies even when the joint action space is not
prohibitively large.
Hence, there is a great need for new RL methods that
can efficiently learn decentralised policies. In some settings,
the learning itself may also need to be decentralised. However, in many cases, learning can take place in a simulator
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

†

Equal contribution

or a laboratory in which extra state information is available and agents can communicate freely. This centralised
training of decentralised policies is a standard paradigm for
multi-agent planning (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis 2008;
Kraemer and Banerjee 2016) and has recently been picked
up by the deep RL community (Foerster et al. 2016; Jorge,
Kågebäck, and Gustavsson 2016). However, the question of
how best to exploit the opportunity for centralised learning
remains open.
Another crucial challenge is multi-agent credit assignment (Chang, Ho, and Kaelbling 2003): in cooperative settings, joint actions typically generate only global rewards,
making it difficult for each agent to deduce its own contribution to the team’s success. Sometimes it is possible to
design individual reward functions for each agent. However,
these rewards are not generally available in cooperative settings and often fail to encourage individual agents to sacrifice for the greater good. This often substantially impedes
multi-agent learning in challenging tasks, even with relatively small numbers of agents.
In this paper, we propose a new multi-agent RL method
called counterfactual multi-agent (COMA) policy gradients,
in order to address these issues. COMA takes an actor-critic
(Konda and Tsitsiklis 2000) approach, in which the actor,
i.e., the policy, is trained by following a gradient estimated
by a critic. COMA is based on three main ideas.
First, COMA uses a centralised critic. The critic is only
used during learning, while only the actor is needed during
execution. Since learning is centralised, we can therefore use
a centralised critic that conditions on the joint action and all
available state information, while each agent’s policy conditions only on its own action-observation history.
Second, COMA uses a counterfactual baseline. The idea
is inspired by difference rewards (Wolpert and Tumer 2002;
Tumer and Agogino 2007), in which each agent learns from
a shaped reward that compares the global reward to the reward received when that agent’s action is replaced with a
default action. While difference rewards are a powerful way
to perform multi-agent credit assignment, they require access to a simulator or estimated reward function, and in general it is unclear how to choose the default action. COMA
addresses this by using the centralised critic to compute an
agent-specific advantage function that compares the estimated return for the current joint action to a counterfactual

baseline that marginalises out a single agent’s action, while
keeping the other agents’ actions fixed. This is similar to calculating an aristocrat utility (Wolpert and Tumer 2002), but
avoids the problem of a recursive interdependence between
the policy and utility function because the expected contribution of the counterfactual baseline to the policy gradient
is zero. Hence, instead of relying on extra simulations, approximations, or assumptions regarding appropriate default
actions, COMA computes a separate baseline for each agent
that relies on the centralised critic to reason about counterfactuals in which only that agent’s action changes.
Third, COMA uses a critic representation that allows the
counterfactual baseline to be computed efficiently. In a single forward pass, it computes the Q-values for all the different actions of a given agent, conditioned on the actions of all
the other agents. Because a single centralised critic is used
for all agents, all Q-values for all agents can be computed in
a single batched forward pass.
We evaluate COMA in the testbed of StarCraft unit micromanagement1 , which has recently emerged as a challenging RL benchmark task with high stochasticity, a large stateaction space, and delayed rewards. Previous works (Usunier
et al. 2016; Peng et al. 2017) have made use of a centralised
control policy that conditions on the entire state and can use
powerful macro-actions, using StarCraft’s built-in planner,
that combine movement and attack actions. To produce a
meaningfully decentralised benchmark that proves challenging for scenarios with even relatively few agents, we propose
a variant that massively reduces each agent’s field-of-view
and removes access to these macro-actions.
Our empirical results on this new benchmark show that
COMA can significantly improve performance over other
multi-agent actor-critic methods, as well as ablated versions
of COMA itself. In addition, COMA’s best agents are competitive with state-of-the-art centralised controllers that are
given access to full state information and macro-actions.

2

Related Work

Although multi-agent RL has been applied in a variety of
settings (Busoniu, Babuska, and De Schutter 2008; Yang and
Gu 2004), it has often been restricted to tabular methods
and simple environments. One exception is recent work in
deep multi-agent RL, which can scale to high dimensional
input and action spaces. Tampuu et al. (2015) use a combination of DQN with independent Q-learning (Tan 1993;
Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2009) to learn how to play twoplayer pong. More recently the same method has been used
by Leibo et al. (2017) to study the emergence of collaboration and defection in sequential social dilemmas.
Also related is work on the emergence of communication
between agents, learned by gradient descent (Das et al. 2017;
Mordatch and Abbeel 2017; Lazaridou, Peysakhovich, and
Baroni 2016; Foerster et al. 2016; Sukhbaatar, Fergus, and
others 2016). In this line of work, passing gradients between
agents during training and sharing parameters are two common ways to take advantage of centralised training. How1
StarCraft and its expansion StarCraft: Brood War are trademarks of Blizzard Entertainment™.

ever, these methods do not allow for extra state information
to be used during learning and do not address the multi-agent
credit assignment problem.
Gupta, Egorov, and Kochenderfer (2017) investigate
actor-critic methods for decentralised execution with centralised training. However, in their methods both the actors
and the critic condition on local, per-agent, observations and
actions, and multi-agent credit assignment is addressed only
with hand-crafted local rewards.
Most previous applications of RL to StarCraft micromanagement use a centralised controller, with access to the full
state, and control of all units, although the architecture of
the controllers exploits the multi-agent nature of the problem. Usunier et al. (2016) use a greedy MDP, which at each
timestep sequentially chooses actions for agents given all
previous actions, in combination with zero-order optimisation, while Peng et al. (2017) use an actor-critic method that
relies on RNNs to exchange information between the agents.
The closest to our problem setting is that of Foerster et
al. (2017), who also use a multi-agent representation and decentralised policies. However, they focus on stabilising experience replay while using DQN and do not make full use
of the centralised training regime. As they do not report on
absolute win-rates we do not compare performance directly.
However, Usunier et al. (2016) address similar scenarios
to our experiments and implement a DQN baseline in a
fully observable setting. In Section 6 we therefore report our
competitive performance against these state-of-the-art baselines, while maintaining decentralised control. Omidshafiei
et al. (2017) also address the stability of experience replay in
multi-agent settings, but assume a fully decentralised training regime.
(Lowe et al. 2017) concurrently propose a multi-agent
policy-gradient algorithm using centralised critics. Their approach does not address multi-agent credit assignment. Unlike our work, it learns a separate centralised critic for each
agent and is applied to competitive environments with continuous action spaces.
Our work builds directly off of the idea of difference
rewards (Wolpert and Tumer 2002). The relationship of
COMA to this line of work is discussed in Section 4.

3

Background

We consider a fully cooperative multi-agent task that can
be described as a stochastic game G, defined by a tuple
G = ⟨S, U, P, r, Z, O, n, γ⟩, in which n agents identified
by a ∈ A ≡ {1, ..., n} choose sequential actions. The environment has a true state s ∈ S. At each time step, each
agent simultaneously chooses an action ua ∈ U , forming
a joint action u ∈ U ≡ U n which induces a transition in
the environment according to the state transition function
P (s′ |s, u) : S × U × S → [0, 1]. The agents all share the
same reward function r(s, u) : S × U → R and γ ∈ [0, 1)
is a discount factor.
We consider a partially observable setting, in which
agents draw observations z ∈ Z according to the observation function O(s, a) : S × A → Z. Each agent has an
action-observation history τ a ∈ T ≡ (Z × U )∗ , on which it

conditions a stochastic policy π a (ua |τ a ) : T × U → [0, 1].
We denote joint quantities over agents in bold, and joint
quantities over agents other than a given agent a with the
superscript −a.
P∞
The discounted return is Rt = l=0 γ l rt+l . The agents’
joint policy induces a value function, i.e., an expectation
over Rt , V π (st ) = Est+1:∞ ,ut:∞ [Rt |st ], and an actionvalue function Qπ (st , ut ) = Est+1:∞ ,ut+1:∞ [Rt |st , ut ].
The advantage function is given by Aπ (st , ut ) =
Qπ (st , ut ) − V π (st ).
Following previous work (Oliehoek, Spaan, and Vlassis
2008; Kraemer and Banerjee 2016; Foerster et al. 2016;
Jorge, Kågebäck, and Gustavsson 2016), our problem setting
allows centralised training but requires decentralised execution. This is a natural paradigm for a large set of multi-agent
problems where training is carried out using a simulator with
additional state information, but the agents must rely on local action-observation histories during execution. To condition on this full history, a deep RL agent may make use of a
recurrent neural network (Hausknecht and Stone 2015), typically with a gated model such as LSTM (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) or GRU (Cho et al. 2014).
In Section 4, we develop a new multi-agent policy gradient method for tackling this setting. In the remainder of
this section, we provide some background on single-agent
policy gradient methods (Sutton et al. 1999). Such methods
optimise a single agent’s policy, parameterised by θπ , by
performing gradient ascent on an estimate of the expected
discounted total reward J = Eπ [R0 ]. Perhaps the simplest
form of policy gradient is REINFORCE (Williams 1992), in
which the gradient is:
" T
#
X
g = Es0:∞ ,u0:∞
Rt ∇θπ log π(ut |st ) .
(1)
t=0

In actor-critic approaches (Sutton et al. 1999; Konda and
Tsitsiklis 2000; Schulman et al. 2015), the actor, i.e., the
policy, is trained by following a gradient that depends on
a critic, which usually estimates a value function. In particular, Rt is replaced by any expression equivalent to
Q(st , ut ) − b(st ), where b(st ) is a baseline designed to reduce variance (Weaver and Tao 2001). A common choice is
b(st ) = V (st ), in which case Rt is replaced by A(st , ut ).
Another option is to replace Rt with the temporal difference
(TD) error rt + γV (st+1 ) − V (s), which is an unbiased estimate of A(st , ut ). In practice, the gradient must be estimated from trajectories sampled from the environment, and
the (action-)value functions must be estimated with function
approximators. Consequently, the bias and variance of the
gradient estimate depends strongly on the exact choice of
estimator (Konda and Tsitsiklis 2000).
In this paper, we train critics f c (·, θc ) on-policy to estimate either Q or V , using a variant of TD(λ) (Sutton
1988) adapted for use with deep neural networks. TD(λ)
Pn
(n)
uses a mixture of n-step returns Gt = l=1 γ l−1 rt+l +
n c
c
γ f (·t+n , θ ). In particular, the critic parameters θc are updated by minibatch gradient descent to minimise the following loss:
Lt (θc ) = (y (λ) − f c (·t , θc ))2 ,
(2)

P∞
(n)
where y (λ) = (1 − λ) n=1 λn−1 Gt , and the n-step
(n)
returns Gt are calculated with bootstrapped values estimated by a target network (Mnih et al. 2015) with parameters copied periodically from θc .

4

Methods

In this section, we describe approaches for extending policy
gradients to our multi-agent setting.

Independent Actor-Critic
The simplest way to apply policy gradients to multiple
agents is to have each agent learn independently, with its
own actor and critic, from its own action-observation history. This is essentially the idea behind independent Qlearning (Tan 1993), which is perhaps the most popular
multi-agent learning algorithm, but with actor-critic in place
of Q-learning. Hence, we call this approach independent
actor-critic (IAC).
In our implementation of IAC, we speed learning by sharing parameters among the agents, i.e., we learn only one actor and one critic, which are used by all agents. The agents
can still behave differently because they receive different observations, including an agent-specific ID, and thus evolve
different hidden states. Learning remains independent in the
sense that each agent’s critic estimates only a local value
function, i.e., one that conditions on ua , not u. Though we
are not aware of previous applications of this specific algorithm, we do not consider it a significant contribution but
instead merely a baseline algorithm.
We consider two variants of IAC. In the first, each agent’s
critic estimates V (τ a ) and follows a gradient based on
the TD error, as described in Section 3. In the second,
each agent’s critic estimates Q(τ a , ua ) and follows a gradient based on the advantage:
A(τ a , ua ) = Q(τ a , ua ) −
P
V (τ a ), where V (τ a ) = ua π(ua |τ a )Q(τ a , ua ). Independent learning is straightforward, but the lack of information
sharing at training time makes it difficult to learn coordinated strategies that depend on interactions between multiple agents, or for an individual agent to estimate the contribution of its actions to the team’s reward.

Counterfactual Multi-Agent Policy Gradients
The difficulties discussed above arise because, beyond parameter sharing, IAC fails to exploit the fact that learning
is centralised in our setting. In this section, we propose
counterfactual multi-agent (COMA) policy gradients, which
overcome this limitation. Three main ideas underly COMA:
1) centralisation of the critic, 2) use of a counterfactual baseline, and 3) use of a critic representation that allows efficient
evaluation of the baseline. The remainder of this section describes these ideas.
First, COMA uses a centralised critic. Note that in IAC,
each actor π(ua |τ a ) and each critic Q(τ a , ua ) or V (τ a )
conditions only on the agent’s own action-observation history τ a . However, the critic is used only during learning
and only the actor is needed during execution. Since learning is centralised, we can therefore use a centralised critic
that conditions on the true global state s, if it is available, as

A1 t

A2 t

Critic
1

𝜋(h , 𝜀)
h

1

𝜋(h , 𝜀)
1

h

ut
Actor 2

Actor 1
u1 t

Aa t

o t, s t

rt , ht-1

u2 t

(uat, 𝜋at)

(𝜀)

2

ut

o 1t

𝜋at =𝜋(hat, 𝜀)

2

2

h at
(hat-1)

GRU

COMA

{Q(ua=1, u-at,..),. .,Q(ua=|U|, u-at,..)}
(hat)

o 2t

Environment

(oat, a, uat-1)

(u-at, st, oat, a, ut-1, ht)

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: In (a), information flow between the decentralised actors, the environment and the centralised critic in COMA; red
arrows and components are only required during centralised learning. In (b) and (c), architectures of the actor and critic.
Actor 2
well as the joint action-observation histories τ . Each actor
way that avoids these problems. COMA learns a centralised
conditions on its own action-observation histories τ a , with
critic, Q(s, τ , u) that estimates Q-values for the joint acparameter sharing, as in IAC. Figure 1a illustrates this setup.
tion u conditioned on the central state s and the joint actionA naive way to use this centralised critic would be for
observation history. For each agent a we can then compute
each actor to follow a gradient based on the TD error estian advantage function that compares the Q-value for the curmated from this critic:
rent action ua to a counterfactual baseline that marginalises
out ua , while keeping the other agents’ actions u−a fixed:
X
g = ∇θπ log π(uat |τta ) (r + γV (st+1 ) − V (st )) .
(3)
π a (u′a |τ a )Q(s, τ , (u−a , u′a )).
Aa (s, τ , u) = Q(s, τ , u)−
However, such an approach fails to address a key credit
u′a
(4)
assignment problem. Because the TD error considers only
Hence, Aa (s, τ , ua ) computes a separate baseline for each
global rewards, the gradient computed for each actor does
agent that uses the centralised critic to reason about counternot explicitly reason about how that particular agent’s acfactuals in which only a’s action changes, learned directly
tions contribute to that global reward. Since the other agents
from agents’ experiences instead of relying on extra simulamay be exploring, the gradient for that agent becomes very
tions, a reward model, or a user-designed default action.
noisy, particularly when there are many agents.
This advantage has the same form as the aristocrat utilTherefore, COMA uses a counterfactual baseline. The
ity (Wolpert and Tumer 2002). However, optimising for an
idea is inspired by difference rewards (Wolpert and Tumer
aristocrat utility using value-based methods creates a self2002), in which each agent learns from a shaped reward
consistency problem because the policy and utility function
Da = r(s, u) − r(s, (u−a , ca )) that compares the global
depend recursively on each other. As a result, prior work
reward to the reward received when the action of agent a is
focused on difference evaluations using default states and
replaced with a default action ca . Any action by agent a that
actions. COMA is different because the counterfactual baseimproves Da also improves the true global reward r(s, u),
line’s expected contribution to the gradient, as with other
because r(s, (u−a , ca )) does not depend on agent a’s acpolicy gradient baselines, is zero. Thus, while the baseline
tions.
does depend on the policy, its expectation does not. ConseDifference rewards are a powerful way to perform multiquently, COMA can use this form of the advantage without
agent credit assignment. However, they typically require
creating a self-consistency problem.
access to a simulator in order to estimate r(s, (u−a , ca )).
When a simulator is already being used for learning, difWhile COMA’s advantage function replaces potential exference rewards increase the number of simulations that
tra simulations with evaluations of the critic, those evalumust be conducted, since each agent’s difference reward
ations may themselves be expensive if the critic is a deep
requires a separate counterfactual simulation. Proper and
neural network. Furthermore, in a typical representation, the
Tumer (2012) and Colby, Curran, and Tumer (2015) pronumber of output nodes of such a network would equal |U |n ,
pose estimating difference rewards using function approxithe size of the joint action space, making it impractical to
mation rather than a simulator. However, this still requires a
train. To address both these issues, COMA uses a critic repuser-specified default action ca that can be difficult to choose
resentation that allows for efficient evaluation of the basein many applications. In an actor-critic architecture, this apline. In particular, the actions of the other agents, u−a
t , are
proach would also introduce an additional source of approxpart of the input to the network, which outputs a Q-value
imation error.
for each of agent a’s actions, as shown in Figure 1c. ConseA key insight underlying COMA is that a centralised
quently, the counterfactual advantage can be calculated efficritic can be used to implement difference rewards in a
ciently by a single forward pass of the actor and critic, for

each agent. Furthermore, the number of outputs is only |U |
instead of (|U |n ). While the network has a large input space
that scales linearly in the number of agents and actions, deep
neural networks can generalise well across such spaces.
In this paper, we focus on settings with discrete actions.
However, COMA can be easily extended to continuous actions spaces by estimating the expectation in (4) with Monte
Carlo samples or using functional forms that render it analytical, e.g., Gaussian policies and critic.
The following lemma establishes the convergence of
COMA to a locally optimal policy. The proof follows directly from the convergence of single-agent actor-critic algorithms (Sutton et al. 1999), and is subject to the same assumptions. Lyu et al. (2024, Appendix E.2) prove a related
result, showing that a family of cooperative policy gradient methods with centralized critics, which includes COMA,
converge to local optima assuming access to the correct policy values, i.e., a perfect critic.
Lemma 1. For an actor-critic algorithm with a compatible
TD(1) critic following a COMA policy gradient
"
#
X
a a a
a
gk = Eπ
∇θk log π (u |τ )A (s, τ , u)
(5)
a

at each iteration k,
lim inf ||∇J|| = 0 w.p. 1.
k

(6)

Proof. See Appendix A.

5

Experimental Setup

In this section, we describe the StarCraft problem to which
we apply COMA, as well as details of the state features,
network architectures, training regimes, and ablations.
Decentralised StarCraft Micromanagement. StarCraft
is a rich environment with stochastic dynamics that cannot
be easily emulated. Many simpler multi-agent settings, such
as Predator-Prey (Tan 1993) or Packet World (Weyns, Helleboogh, and Holvoet 2005), by contrast, have full simulators
with controlled randomness that can be freely set to any state
in order to perfectly replay experiences. This makes it possible, though computationally expensive, to compute difference rewards via extra simulations. In StarCraft, as in the
real world, this is not possible.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of micromanagement in StarCraft, which refers to the low-level control of individual units’ positioning and attack commands
as they fight enemies. This task is naturally represented as
a multi-agent system, where each StarCraft unit is replaced
by a decentralised controller. We consider several scenarios
with symmetric teams formed of: 3 marines (3m), 5 marines
(5m), 5 wraiths (5w), or 2 dragoons with 3 zealots (2d 3z).
The enemy team is controlled by the StarCraft AI, which
uses reasonable but suboptimal hand-crafted heuristics.
We allow the agents to choose from a set of discrete
actions: move[direction], attack[enemy id],
stop, and noop. In the StarCraft game, when a unit selects
an attack action, it first moves into attack range before
firing, using the game’s built-in pathfinding to choose a

route. These powerful attack-move macro-actions make the
control problem considerably easier.
To create a more challenging benchmark that is meaningfully decentralised, we impose a restricted field of view
on the agents, equal to the firing range of ranged units’
weapons, shown in Figure 2. This departure from the standard setup for centralised StarCraft control has three effects.

x

Figure 2: Starting position with example local field of view
for the 2d 3z map.
First, it introduces significant partial observability. Second, it means units can only attack when they are in range
of enemies, removing access to the StarCraft macro-actions.
Third, agents cannot distinguish between enemies who are
dead and those who are out of range and so can issue invalid attack commands at such enemies, which results in no
action being taken. This substantially increases the average
size of the action space, which in turn increases the difficulty
of both exploration and control.
Under these difficult conditions, scenarios with even relatively small numbers of units become much harder to solve.
As seen in Table 1, we compare against a simple hand-coded
heuristic that instructs the agents to run forwards into range
and then focus their fire, attacking each enemy in turn until
it dies. This heuristic achieves a 98% win rate on 5m with
a full field of view, but only 66% in our setting. To perform
well in this task, the agents must learn to cooperate by positioning properly and focussing their fire, while remembering
which enemy and ally units are alive or out of view.
All agents receive the same global reward at each time
step, equal to the sum of damage inflicted on the opponent
units minus half the damage taken. Killing an opponent generates a reward of 10 points, and winning the game generates
a reward equal to the team’s remaining total health plus 200.
This damage-based reward signal is comparable to that used
by Usunier et al. (2016). Unlike (Peng et al. 2017), our approach does not require estimating local rewards.
State Features. The actor and critic receive different input features, corresponding to local observations and global
state, respectively. Both include features for allies and enemies. Units can be either allies or enemies, while agents are
the decentralised controllers that command ally units.
The local observations for every agent are drawn only
from a circular subset of the map centred on the unit it
controls and include for each unit within this field of view:
distance, relative x, relative y, unit type

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

IAC-V

c e ntral-QV
he uris tic

Ave rag e Win %

Ave rag e Win %

COMA
c e ntral-V

20k 40k 60k 80k 100k 120k 140k
# Epis o de s

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

10k 20k 30k 40k 50k 60k 70k
# Epis o de s

(b) 5m
70
Ave rag e Win %

Ave rag e Win %

(a) 3m

IAC-Q

5k

10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k
# Epis o de s

(c) 5w

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

5k 10k 15k 20k 25k 30k 35k 40k
# Epis o de s

(d) 2d 3z

Figure 3: Win rates for COMA and competing algorithms on four different scenarios. COMA outperforms all baseline methods.
Centralised critics also clearly outperform their decentralised counterparts. The legend at the top applies across all plots.
and shield.2 All features are normalised by their maximum values. We do not include any information about the
units’ current target.
The global state representation consists of similar features, but for all units on the map regardless of fields of
view. Absolute distance is not included, and x-y locations
are given relative to the centre of the map rather than to
a particular agent. The global state also includes health
points and cooldown for all agents. The representation fed to the centralised Q-function critic is the concatenation of the global state representation with the local observation of the agent whose actions are being evaluated.
Our centralised critic that estimates V (s), and is therefore
agent-agnostic, receives the global state concatenated with
all agents’ observations. The observations contain no new
information but include the egocentric distances relative to
that agent.
Architecture & Training. The actor consists of 128-bit
gated recurrent units (GRUs) (Cho et al. 2014) that use
fully connected layers both to process the input and to produce the output values from the hidden state, hat . The IAC
2
After firing, a unit’s cooldown is reset, and it must drop
before firing again. Shields absorb damage until they break, after
which units start losing health. Dragoons and zealots have shields
but marines do not.

critics use extra output heads appended to the last layer of
the actor network. Action probabilities are produced from
the final layer, z, via a bounded softmax distribution that
lower-bounds the probability of any given action by ϵ/|U |:
P (u) = (1 − ϵ)softmax(z)u + ϵ/|U |). We anneal ϵ linearly from 0.5 to 0.02 across 750 training episodes. The centralised critic is a feedforward network with multiple ReLU
layers combined with fully connected layers. Hyperparameters were coarsely tuned on the 5m scenario and then used
for all other maps. We found that the most sensitive parameter was TD(λ), but settled on λ = 0.8, which worked best
for both COMA and our baselines. Our implementation uses
TorchCraft (Synnaeve et al. 2016) and Torch 7 (Collobert,
Kavukcuoglu, and Farabet 2011). Pseudocode and further
details on the training procedure are in the supplementary
material.
We experimented with critic architectures that are factored at the agent level and further exploit internal parameter
sharing. However, we found that the bottleneck for scalability was not the centralisation of the critic, but rather the difficulty of multi-agent exploration. Hence, we defer further
investigation of factored COMA critics to future work.
Ablations. We perform ablation experiments to validate
three key elements of COMA. First, we test the importance
of centralising the critic by comparing against two IAC vari-

Local Field of View (FoV)

Full FoV, Central Control

map

heur.

IAC-V

IAC-Q

cnt-V

cnt-QV

COMA
mean best

heur.

DQN

GMEZO

3m
5m
5w
2d 3z

35
66
70
63

47 (3)
63 (2)
18 (5)
27 (9)

56 (6)
58 (3)
57 (5)
19 (21)

83 (3)
67 (5)
65 (3)
36 (6)

83 (5)
71 (9)
76 (1)
39 (5)

87 (3)
81 (5)
82 (3)
47 (5)

74
98
82
68

99
70
61

100
743
90

98
95
98
65

Table 1: Mean win percentage averaged across final 1000 evaluation episodes for the different maps, for all methods and the
hand-coded heuristic in the decentralised setting with a limited field of view. The highest mean performances are in bold, while
values in parentheses denote the 95% confidence interval, for example 87(3) = 87 ± 3. Also shown, maximum win percentages
for COMA (decentralised), in comparison to the heuristic and published results (evaluated in the centralised setting).
ants, IAC-Q and IAC-V . These critics take the same decentralised input as the actor, and share parameters with the actor network up to the final layer. IAC-Q then outputs |U |
Q-values, one for each action, while IAC-V outputs a single state-value. Note that we still share parameters between
agents, using the egocentric observations and ID’s as part of
the input to allow different behaviours to emerge. The cooperative reward function is still shared by all agents.
Second, we test the significance of learning Q instead of
V . The method central-V still uses a central state for the
critic, but learns V (s), and uses the TD error to estimate the
advantage for policy gradient updates.
Third, we test the utility of our counterfactual baseline.
The method central-QV learns both Q and V simultaneously and estimates the advantage as Q − V , replacing
COMA’s counterfactual baseline with V . All methods use
the same architecture and training scheme for the actors, and
all critics are trained with TD(λ).

6

Results

Figure 3 shows average win rates as a function of episode for
each method and each StarCraft scenario. For each method,
we conducted 35 independent trials and froze learning every 100 training episodes to evaluate the learned policies
across 200 episodes per method, plotting the average across
episodes and trials. Also shown is one standard deviation in
performance.
The results show that COMA is superior to the IAC baselines in all scenarios. Interestingly, the IAC methods also
eventually learn reasonable policies in 5m, although they
need substantially more episodes to do so. This may seem
counterintuitive since in the IAC methods, the actor and
critic networks share parameters in their early layers (see
Section 5), which could be expected to speed learning. However, these results suggest that the improved accuracy of policy evaluation made possible by conditioning on the global
state outweighs the overhead of training a separate network.
Furthermore, COMA strictly dominates central-QV , both
in training speed and in final performance across all settings.
This is a strong indicator that our counterfactual baseline is
crucial when using a central Q-critic to train decentralised

policies.
Learning a state-value function has the obvious advantage
of not conditioning on the joint action. Still, we find that
COMA outperforms the central-V baseline in final performance. Furthermore, COMA typically achieves good policies faster, which is expected as COMA provides a shaped
training signal. Training is also more stable than central-V ,
which is a consequence of the COMA gradient tending to
zero as the policy becomes greedy. Overall, COMA is the
best performing and most consistent method.
Usunier et al. (2016) report the performance of their best
agents trained with their state-of-the-art centralised controller labelled GMEZO (greedy-MDP with episodic zeroorder optimisation), and for a centralised DQN controller,
both given a full field of view and access to attack-move
macro-actions. These results are compared in Table 1 against
the best agents trained with COMA for each map. Clearly,
in most settings these agents achieve performance comparable to the best published win rates despite being restricted to
decentralised policies and local fields of view.

7

Conclusions & Future Work

This paper presented COMA policy gradients, a method
that uses a centralised critic in order to estimate a counterfactual advantage for decentralised policies in mutliagent RL. COMA addresses the challenges of multi-agent
credit assignment by using a counterfactual baseline that
marginalises out a single agent’s action, while keeping
the other agents’ actions fixed. Our results in a decentralised StarCraft unit micromanagement benchmark show
that COMA significantly improves final performance and
training speed over other multi-agent actor-critic methods
and remains competitive with state-of-the-art centralised
controllers under best-performance reporting. Future work
will extend COMA to tackle scenarios with large numbers
of agents, where centralised critics are more difficult to train
and exploration is harder to coordinate. We also aim to develop more sample-efficient variants that are practical for
real-world applications such as self-driving cars.
3
5w DQN and GMEZO benchmark performances are of a policy trained on a larger map and tested on 5w

Acknowledgements
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement number 637713). It was also supported by the OxfordGoogle DeepMind Graduate Scholarship, the UK EPSRC
CDT in Autonomous Intelligent Machines and Systems, and
a generous grant from Microsoft for their Azure cloud computing services. We would like to thank Nando de Freitas,
Yannis Assael, and Brendan Shillingford for helpful comments and discussion. We also thank Gabriel Synnaeve,
Zeming Lin, and the rest of the TorchCraft team at FAIR
for their work on the interface.

Errata
An earlier version of this paper contained an error in the
proof of Lemma 1 because the critic depended on the state
s but not the joint history τ . In this version, Equation 4 and
Figure 1 have been updated to add this dependence. In addition, the proof of Lemma 1 has been revised to show explicitly how existing policy gradient results apply to this modified setting. The proof also refers to the Sutton et al. (1999)
result instead of that of Konda and Tsitsiklis (2000) as the
latter requires that the Markov chain induced by the policy
be irreducible, which does not hold for history-based state
representations. Thanks to Frans Oliehoek and Chris Amato
for pointing out these issues. Thanks also to Frans Oliehoek
and Andrea Baisero for feedback on the revised proof. See
also Lyu et al.; Lyu et al.; Lyu et al.; Lyu et al. (2021; 2022;
2023; 2024) for more details on this topic.

References
Busoniu, L.; Babuska, R.; and De Schutter, B. 2008. A
comprehensive survey of multiagent reinforcement learning.
IEEE Transactions on Systems Man and Cybernetics Part C
Applications and Reviews 38(2):156.
Cao, Y.; Yu, W.; Ren, W.; and Chen, G. 2013. An overview
of recent progress in the study of distributed multi-agent
coordination. IEEE Transactions on Industrial informatics
9(1):427–438.
Chang, Y.-H.; Ho, T.; and Kaelbling, L. P. 2003. All learning
is local: Multi-agent learning in global reward games. In
NIPS, 807–814.
Cho, K.; van Merriënboer, B.; Bahdanau, D.; and Bengio, Y. 2014. On the properties of neural machine
translation: Encoder-decoder approaches. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1259.
Colby, M. K.; Curran, W.; and Tumer, K. 2015. Approximating difference evaluations with local information. In
Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 1659–1660. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Collobert, R.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; and Farabet, C. 2011.
Torch7: A matlab-like environment for machine learning. In
BigLearn, NIPS Workshop.

Das, A.; Kottur, S.; Moura, J. M.; Lee, S.; and Batra, D.
2017. Learning cooperative visual dialog agents with deep
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06585.
Foerster, J.; Assael, Y. M.; de Freitas, N.; and Whiteson, S.
2016. Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2137–2145.
Foerster, J.; Nardelli, N.; Farquhar, G.; Torr, P.; Kohli, P.;
Whiteson, S.; et al. 2017. Stabilising experience replay for
deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
The 34th International Conference on Machine Learning.
Gupta, J. K.; Egorov, M.; and Kochenderfer, M. 2017. Cooperative multi-agent control using deep reinforcement learning.
Hausknecht, M., and Stone, P. 2015. Deep recurrent
q-learning for partially observable mdps. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1507.06527.
Hochreiter, S., and Schmidhuber, J. 1997. Long short-term
memory. Neural computation 9(8):1735–1780.
Jorge, E.; Kågebäck, M.; and Gustavsson, E. 2016. Learning
to play guess who? and inventing a grounded language as a
consequence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03218.
Konda, V. R., and Tsitsiklis, J. N. 2000. Actor-critic algorithms. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 1008–1014.
Kraemer, L., and Banerjee, B. 2016. Multi-agent reinforcement learning as a rehearsal for decentralized planning. Neurocomputing 190:82–94.
Lazaridou, A.; Peysakhovich, A.; and Baroni, M. 2016.
Multi-agent cooperation and the emergence of (natural) language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.07182.
Leibo, J. Z.; Zambaldi, V.; Lanctot, M.; Marecki, J.; and
Graepel, T. 2017. Multi-agent reinforcement learning in sequential social dilemmas. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03037.
Lowe, R.; Wu, Y.; Tamar, A.; Harb, J.; Abbeel, P.; and
Mordatch, I. 2017. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed
cooperative-competitive environments.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.02275.
Lyu, X.; Xiao, Y.; Daley, B.; and Amato, C. 2021. Contrasting centralized and decentralized critics in multi-agent
reinforcement learning. arXiv 2102.04402.
Lyu, X.; Baisero, A.; Xiao, Y.; and Amato, C. 2022. A
deeper understanding of state-based critics in multi-agent
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 36, 9396–9404.
Lyu, X.; Baisero, A.; Xiao, Y.; Daley, B.; and Amato, C.
2023. On centralized critics in multi-agent reinforcement
learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 77:295–
354.
Lyu, X.; Baisero, A.; Xiao, Y.; Daley, B.; and Amato, C.
2024. On centralized critics in multi-agent reinforcement
learning. arXiv 2408.14597.
Mnih, V.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Silver, D.; Rusu, A. A.; Veness, J.; Bellemare, M. G.; Graves, A.; Riedmiller, M.;

Fidjeland, A. K.; Ostrovski, G.; et al. 2015. Humanlevel control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature
518(7540):529–533.
Mordatch, I., and Abbeel, P. 2017. Emergence of grounded
compositional language in multi-agent populations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1703.04908.
Oliehoek, F. A.; Spaan, M. T. J.; and Vlassis, N. 2008. Optimal and approximate Q-value functions for decentralized
POMDPs. 32:289–353.
Omidshafiei, S.; Pazis, J.; Amato, C.; How, J. P.; and Vian,
J. 2017. Deep decentralized multi-task multi-agent rl under
partial observability. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06182.
Peng, P.; Yuan, Q.; Wen, Y.; Yang, Y.; Tang, Z.; Long, H.;
and Wang, J. 2017. Multiagent bidirectionally-coordinated
nets for learning to play starcraft combat games. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1703.10069.
Proper, S., and Tumer, K. 2012. Modeling difference rewards for multiagent learning. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems-Volume 3, 1397–1398. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Schulman, J.; Moritz, P.; Levine, S.; Jordan, M. I.; and
Abbeel, P. 2015. High-dimensional continuous control using
generalized advantage estimation. CoRR abs/1506.02438.
Shoham, Y., and Leyton-Brown, K. 2009. Multiagent Systems: Algorithmic, Game-Theoretic, and Logical Foundations. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sukhbaatar, S.; Fergus, R.; et al. 2016. Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2244–2252.
Sutton, R. S.; McAllester, D. A.; Singh, S. P.; Mansour, Y.;
et al. 1999. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement
learning with function approximation. In NIPS, volume 99,
1057–1063.
Sutton, R. S. 1988. Learning to predict by the methods of
temporal differences. Machine learning 3(1):9–44.
Synnaeve, G.; Nardelli, N.; Auvolat, A.; Chintala, S.;
Lacroix, T.; Lin, Z.; Richoux, F.; and Usunier, N. 2016.
Torchcraft: a library for machine learning research on realtime strategy games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00625.
Tampuu, A.; Matiisen, T.; Kodelja, D.; Kuzovkin, I.; Korjus,
K.; Aru, J.; Aru, J.; and Vicente, R. 2015. Multiagent cooperation and competition with deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.08779.
Tan, M. 1993. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In Proceedings of the tenth
international conference on machine learning, 330–337.
Tumer, K., and Agogino, A. 2007. Distributed agent-based
air traffic flow management. In Proceedings of the 6th international joint conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems, 255. ACM.
Usunier, N.; Synnaeve, G.; Lin, Z.; and Chintala, S. 2016.
Episodic exploration for deep deterministic policies: An application to starcraft micromanagement tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.02993.

Weaver, L., and Tao, N. 2001. The optimal reward baseline
for gradient-based reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the Seventeenth conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, 538–545. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Weyns, D.; Helleboogh, A.; and Holvoet, T. 2005. The
packet-world: A test bed for investigating situated multiagent systems. In Software Agent-Based Applications, Platforms and Development Kits. Springer. 383–408.
Williams, R. J. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following
algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning 8(3-4):229–256.
Wolpert, D. H., and Tumer, K. 2002. Optimal payoff functions for members of collectives. In Modeling complexity in
economic and social systems. World Scientific. 355–369.
Yang, E., and Gu, D. 2004. Multiagent reinforcement learning for multi-robot systems: A survey. Technical report,
tech. rep.
Ye, D.; Zhang, M.; and Yang, Y. 2015. A multi-agent framework for packet routing in wireless sensor networks. sensors
15(5):10026–10047.
Ying, W., and Dayong, S. 2005. Multi-agent framework
for third party logistics in e-commerce. Expert Systems with
Applications 29(2):431–436.

A

Proof of Lemma 1

The COMA gradient is given by
"
X

#
a

a

a

a

∇θ log π (u |τ )A (s, τ , u) ,

(7)

Aa (s, τ , u) = Q(s, τ , u) − b(s, τ , u−a ),

(8)

g = Eπ

a

where θ are the parameters of all actor policies, e.g., θ = {θ1 , . . . , θ|A| }, and b(s, τ , u−a ) is the counterfactual baseline defined
in equation 4.
First consider the expected contribution of the baseline:

X
X
X
a a a
−a
gb = −
p(s, τ )
π(u|τ )
∇θ log π (u |τ )b(s, τ , u ) ,
(9)
=−
=−
=−

s,τ

u

X

XX

p(s, τ )

a

a u−a

X

XX
a u−a

X

XX

p(s, τ )

(u

|τ

−a

)

X

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

−a


) ,

−a

π (u |τ )∇θ log π (u |τ )b(s, τ , u


) ,

(10)

π

−a

−a

(u

|τ

−a

)

X

a

∇θ π (u |τ )b(s, τ , u

(11)

ua

s,τ

s,τ

−a

ua

s,τ

p(s, τ )

π

−a

π

−a

−a

(u

|τ

−a

−a

)b(s, τ , u


) ∇θ 1 ,

(12)

a u−a

= 0,

(13)

where τ −a is the joint action-observation history of all agents except a, and π −a is the joint policy of all agents except a.
Clearly, the per-agent baseline, although it may reduce variance, does not change the expected gradient, and therefore does not
affect the convergence of COMA. The key feature of the counterfactual baseline which allows this property is the independence
for agent a on the action ua .
The remainder of the expected policy gradient is given by:
"
#
X
a a a
g = Eπ
∇θ log π (u |τ )Q(s, τ , u)
(14)
a

"
= Eπ ∇θ log

#
Y

a

a

a

π (u |τ )Q(s, τ , u) .

(15)

a

By writing the joint policy as the product of the independent actors,
Y
π(u|τ ) =
π a (ua |τ a ),

(16)

a

we can rewrite (15) as:
g = Eπ [∇θ log π(u|τ )Q(s, τ , u)] .

(17)

Furthermore, we can reinterpret π as a single-agent policy in a corresponding MDP M = ⟨Sm , Um , Pm , rm , γ⟩ where,
• Sm = S × T;
• Um = U;
• Pm (s′m |sm ) = P (s′ , τ ′ |s, τ ) = P (s′ |s)1= (z′ , z), where τ ′ is τ extended with z′ , z = [O(s′ , 1), . . . , O(s′ , n)], and
1= (z′ , z) = 1 iff z′ = z; and
• rm ((s, τ ), u) = r(s, u).
The gradient g in the stochastic game G corresponds to the standard policy gradient gradient in M :
gm = Eπm [∇θ log πm (um |sm )Q(sm , um )] ,

(18)

where πm (um |sm ) = πm (um |s, τ ) = π(u|τ ), i.e., πm follows the policy in (16), foregoing the option of depending on s.
Sutton et al. (1999) prove that an actor-critic following this gradient converges to a local maximum of the expected return, given
several assumptions, including:

1. the MDP has bounded rewards;
2. the policy is differentiable;
3. the critic is trained against unbiased targets, as in TD(1);
4. the critic has converged to a local optimum before each policy gradient is estimated; and
5. the critic uses a representation compatible with the policy.
The policy parameterisation (i.e., the single-agent joint-action learner is decomposed into independent actors) is immaterial to
convergence, as long as it remains differentiable.

B

Training Details and Hyperparameters

Training is performed in batch mode, with a batch size of 30. Due to parameter sharing, all agents can be processed in parallel,
with each agent for each episode and time step occupying one batch entry. The training cycle progresses in three steps (completion of all three steps constitutes as one episode in our graphs): 1) collect data: collect 30
n episodes; 2) train critic: for each
time step, apply a gradient step to the feed-forward critic, starting at the end of the episode; and 3) train actor: fully unroll the
recurrent part of the actor, aggregate gradients in the backward pass across all time steps, and apply a gradient update.
We use a target network for the critic, which updates every 150 training steps for the feed-forward centralised critics and
every 50 steps for the recurrent IAC critics. The feed-forward critic receives more learning steps, since it performs a parameter
update for each timestep. Both the actor and the critic networks are trained using RMS-prop with learning rate 0.0005 and alpha
0.99, without weight decay. We set gamma to 0.99 for all maps.
Although tuning the skip-frame in StarCraft can improve absolute performance (Peng et al. 2017), we use a default value of
7, since the main focus is a relative evaluation between COMA and the baselines.

C

Algorithm

Algorithm 1 Counterfactual Multi-Agent (COMA) Policy Gradients
Initialise θ1c , θ̂1c , θπ
for each training episode e do
Empty buffer
do
for ec = 1 to BatchSize
n
s1 = initial state, t = 0, ha0 = 0 for each agent a
while st ̸= terminal and t < T do
t=t+1
for each agent a do

hat = Actor oat , hat−1 , uat−1 , a, u; θi
Sample uat from π(hat , ϵ(e))
Get reward rt and next state st+1
Add episode to buffer
Collate episodes in buffer into single batch
for t = 1 to T do // from now processing all agents in parallel via single batch
Batch unroll RNN using states, actions and rewards
Calculate TD(λ) targets yta using θ̂ic
for t = T down to 1 do 
∆Qat = yta − Q saj , u
∆θc = ∇θc (∆Qat )2 // calculate critic gradient
c
θi+1
= θic − α∆θc // update critic weights
Every C steps reset θ̂ic = θic
for t = T down to 1 do
P
Aa (sat , u) = Q(sat , u) − u Q(sat , u, u−a )π(u|hat ) // calculate COMA
∆θπ = ∆θπ + ∇θπ log π(u|hat )Aa (sat , u) // accumulate actor gradients
π
θi+1 = θiπ + α∆θπ // update actor weights

