arXiv:1807.09427v1 [cs.AI] 25 Jul 2018

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: A
Report on Challenges and Approaches
Sanyam Kapoor
sanyam@nyu.edu
July 26, 2018
Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a learning paradigm concerned with
learning to control a system so as to maximize an objective over the long
term. This approach to learning has received immense interest in recent
times and success manifests itself in the form of human-level performance
on games like Go. While RL is emerging as a practical component in reallife systems, most successes have been in Single Agent domains. This report
will instead specifically focus on challenges that are unique to Multi-Agent
Systems interacting in mixed cooperative and competitive environments.
The report concludes with advances in the paradigm of training Multi-Agent
Systems called Decentralized Actor, Centralized Critic, based on an extension of MDPs called Decentralized Partially Observable MDPs, which has
seen a renewed interest lately.

1

Contents
List of Figures

3

1

Introduction

4

1.1

The Reinforcement Learning Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

1.2

A Note on Evolutionary Computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

1.3

Motivating the Multi-Agent Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

2

3

4

5

6

Formal Background

6

2.1

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

2.2

Value Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

2.3

Bellman Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Reinforcement Learning and Control

10

3.1

Q-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

3.2

Policy Gradient Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

3.3

Actor-Critic Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

3.4

Deterministic Policy Gradients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

Challenges in Multi-Agent Environments

14

4.1

Joint Action Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

4.2

Game-Theoretic Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

4.3

Credit Assignment and Lazy Agent Problem . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

4.4

Non-Markovian Nature of Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

Decentralized Actor, Centralized Critic

17

5.1

19

Experiments with Pommerman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Future Work

20

Acknowlegements

21

2

References

21

List of Figures
1

The agent-environment feedback loop [Sutton and Barto, 1998] . .

4

2

Example of a simple MDP with three states (green circles) and
two actions (orange circles), with two rewards (orange arrows).
by Waldoalvarez distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 license . . . . . .

7

3

The matrix-game for “Rock, Paper, Scissors” [Littman, 1994] . . .

15

4

Overview of Multi-Agent Decentralized Actor, Centralized Critic
approach [Lowe et al., 2017] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

5

Information Flow in COMA [Foerster et al., 2017] . . . . . . . .

19

6

Information Flow in QMIX [Rashid et al., 2018] . . . . . . . . . .

20

3

1

Introduction

1.1

The Reinforcement Learning Problem

Reinforcement Learning (RL) refers to both the learning problem and sub-field of
machine learning. The learning problem is to control a system so as to maximize
a numerical value which represents a long-term objective. The learner is known
as the agent and everything outside the agent is known as the environment. The
agent selects actions and the environment responds by presenting a reward and a
new state. A canonical view of this feedback loop is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: The agent-environment feedback loop [Sutton and Barto, 1998]
Reinforcement Learning, in a sense, is the most general formulation of the learning problem. Unlike Supervised Learning, the feedback is partial and in many
cases the rewards are delayed. It also differs from Unsupervised Learning because
the aim is not to find hidden structure in unlabeled data but to solely maximize the
reward signal. This importance of the reward signal is embodied by an informal
idea known as the reward hypothesis [Sutton and Barto, 1998].
Hypothesis 1 (The Reward Hypothesis). That all of what we mean by goals and
purposes can be well thought of as the maximization of the expected value of the
cumulative sum of a received scalar signal (called reward).
The Reward Hypothesis is a matter of ongoing discussion and has not yet received
a convincing consensus1 . An RL researcher is conventionally expected to come
up with a good reward function and subsequently provide a robust RL algorithm
to generalize to unseen trajectories of the feedback loop seen in Figure 1. The
process of designing rewards for the problem is known as reward shaping. It has
had apparent criticism because deciding the right reward is a crucial and delicate matter. Exhaustively modeling dependencies in the environment can become
messy very quickly. This limitation has kept the reward functions in the literature
1

Some perspectives can be read at http://incompleteideas.net/rlai.cs.ualberta.
ca/RLAI/rewardhypothesis.html

4

to be relatively simple and easy to interpret. For instance, in a zero-sum game the
rewards are sparse (+1 for a win and −1 for a loss). In other cases, where time is
critical to achieve the objective, a reward of −1 is given until the agent reaches the
objective.
In the following discussion, this hypothesis is assumed to be true. This assumption
is motivated by the promise shown in recent works which use fairly simple and
interpretable reward structures. The reader is however invited to read a more
formal discussion around reward shaping in [Ng et al., 1999].

1.2

A Note on Evolutionary Computation

It is worth acknowledging Evolutionary Computation (EC) as an alternative formulation of the problem of learning autonomous agents. This is a family of techniques in which abstract Darwinian models of evolution are applied to refine populations of candidate solutions to a given problem. The refinement happens when
the fitness function is used to modify the current population with a breed of new
individuals via Genetic Algorithms (GA) and Evolution Strategies (ES). Interested
readers are invited to read [DeJong and Jong, 2002].
EC is different from RL in that there is no explicit interaction between the environment and the agent (or an individual in EC). The interaction, if any, happens
implicitly via the fitness function leading to selection, mutation or breeding of individuals. As a result, these methods ignore much of the structure that is available
in the Reinforcement Learning setting - they don’t observe the trajectory of states
& actions that an agent goes through to achieve the objective. The set of trajectories can provide a rich signal to be exploited and potentially generalize unseen
environments better.
Subsequently, a detailed discussion on EC, the comparison of EC and RL algorithms and the idea of hybrid EC-RL based approaches are beyond the scope of
this work. Recent work by [Salimans et al., 2017] discovers that Evolution Strategies represent simple hill- climbing in a high-dimensional space based only on
finite differences and might be of interest to relevant audience.

1.3

Motivating the Multi-Agent Setting

The grand vision of Artifical Intelligence since its inception has been to build
autonomous agents that can interact with the environment and amongst each other.
RL formulation of the learning problem for single agents comes the closest to
this vision. Most successes in RL have been in Single Agent domains where the
5

environment stays largely stationary. It is also promising to see RL being used in
large scale systems such as data center cooling [dee, ]. Nevertheless, progress in
Multi-Agent RL Systems is due.
A number of complex problems in today’s society can be modeled as a MultiAgent Learning problems. A few examples include Multi-robot control [Matignon
et al., 2012], analysis of social dilemmas [Leibo et al., 2017], managing air traffic
flow [Agogino and Tumer, 2012] and energy distribution [Pipattanasomporn et al.,
2009]. Traditional RL algorithms are poorly suited for such problems as we will
discuss in forthcoming sections.
The StarCraft II Learning Environment [Vinyals et al., 2017] has emerged to be
a popular testbed for Multi-Agent RL algorithms because it allows for granular
control over the objectives and constraints in the environment map. While being
a formidable environment to be mastered given the enormous complexity in the
interactions, my focus recently has been on a simpler and interpretable environment called Pommerman [pom, ]. This environment derives from the Bomberman
game where four agents compete each other to be the last one standing (or in a
team the last team standing).
The rest of the report organized as follows - Section 2 discusses the key theoretical underpinnings behind Reinforcement Learning. Section 3 expands on the
theory to provide a review of approximate approaches to RL problems. Section
4 discusses the unique challenges that a Multi-Agent environment faces. Section
5 gives a non-exhaustive review of some of the recent approaches tackling the
multi-agent problem. Section 6 presents research goals and expectations from the
future.

2

Formal Background

This section highlights the key definitions and theoretical underpinnings of modern Reinforcement Learning algorithms.

2.1

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) allow a mathematically idealized formulation of the reinforcement learning problem and have their origins in dynamical
systems. The agent and environment interact at discrete time steps t. At each time
step the agent receives a state S t and decides to take an action At . The environment
responds by giving a reward Rt+1 and a new state S t+1 . Therefore, this repeated
6

process gives rise to a sequence known as the trajectory

S 0 , A0 , R1 , S 1 , A1 , . . .

(1)

The dynamics of the environment are defined by a probability distribution which
defines the probability that taking an action At−1 in state S t−1 will give a reward
Rt and move the agent to state S t . This part of the system is outside the control
of agent(s). The exclusive dependence on just the current state and not the complete history makes this process Markovian and is crucial to various theoretical
properties. We now see a formal definition of MDPs.
Definition 1 (Markov Decision Process). A Markov decision process is a tuple
(S, A, R, p) such that

p(s0 , r|s, a) = Pr S t = s0 , Rt = r | S t−1 = s, At−1 = a

(2)

where S t ∈ S (state space), At ∈ A (action space), Rt ∈ R (reward space) and p
defines the dynamics of the process.

Figure 2: Example of a simple MDP with three states (green circles) and two
actions (orange circles), with two rewards (orange arrows). by Waldoalvarez distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 license
Before we go on to define the objective of a Reinforcement Learning agent, we
define the notion of returns. Returns are one way of capturing the “long-term”
objective of an RL agent.

7

Definition 2 (Discounted Returns). Discounted Return is defined as the total
sum of rewards following a time step t until the end of the sequence of rewards
discounted by a factor γ at each time step
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2 Rt+3 + . . .
Gt = Rt+1 + γGt+1

(3)

where Ri ∈ R ∀i and γ ∈ [0, 1].
The notion of discounted returns is important for it being a good objective for the
“long-term” because it controls the degree of importance of future rewards for the
current time step. An agent which tries to maximize the objective with γ = 0 is
called “myopic” and γ = 1 gives us the undiscounted returns, being more sensitive
to changes in rewards from the future.
It is important to note that γ < 1 for continuing tasks because the returns must not
diverge. We will use returns and discounted returns interchangeably from now
onwards.

2.2

Value Functions

We are now ready to define two imperative value functions which serve as the
objective of almost all reinforcement learning algorithms.
Definition 3 (Policy). A policy is defined as the probability distribution of actions
at a given states.
π(At = a | S t = s) ∀S t ∈ S

(4)

where At ∈ A(s) is the state specific action space.
P
As with any probability distribution, a π(At = a | S t = s) = 1. When the agent
follows a policy, it gives rise to a trajectory as seen in Equation 1.
Definition 4 (State Value Function). Value function of a state s under policy π is
defined as the expected return when starting in state s and following a policy π to
take actions
V π (s) = Eπ [Gt | S t = s] ∀s ∈ S

(5)

Definition 5 (Action Value Function). Value function of a state s and action a
under policy π is defined as the expected return when starting in state s, taking
action a and following a policy π to take actions further.
Qπ (s, a) = Eπ [Gt | S t = s, At = a] ∀s ∈ S, a ∈ A(s)
8

(6)

2.3

Bellman Equations

The value functions defined above take a nice recursive form which are defined by
the Bellman Equations [Bellman, 1957] from Dynamic Programming literature.
Definition 6. The Bellman Expectation Equation for V π (s) is given by
V π (s) = Eπ [Gt | S t = s]


= Eπ Rt+1 + γGt+1 | S t = s


X
X




0
0
=
π(a|s) 
p(s , r|s, a) r + γE Gt+1 |S t+1 = s 
a
s0 ,r


X
X



=
π(a|s) 
p(s0 , r|s, a) r + γV π (s0 ) 
a
s0 ,r


= Eπ Rt+1 + γV π (S t+1 ) | S t = s

(7)

The above expectation considers all possibilities of actions by the policy and the
induced states by those actions defined by the environment dynamics. Similarly,
we have
Definition 7. The Bellman Expectation Equation for Qπ (s, a) is given by
Qπ (s, a) = Eπ [Gt | S t = s, At = a]


= Eπ Rt+1 + γQπ (S t+1 , At+1 ) | S t = s, At = a

(8)

It turns out, that for a finite MDP, both the Bellman equations above have a unique
solution that can be solved by a system of linear equations defined recursively in
definitions 6 and 7. A concise matrix solution is given in Equation 9.
Vπ = Rπ + γPπ Vπ
π

π −1

=⇒ V = (I − γP ) R

(9)
π

(10)

where Vπ represents the value vector for each node in a Markov decision process
under a policy π and Pπ represents the state transition matrix. It should be noted
that the runtime of this form is prohibitive in practice (O(n3 )) and we will see
practical solutions in §3. This also forms the solution for action value because of
the following relation
π

V (s) =

X

π(a|s)Qπ (s, a)

a

9

(11)

Hence, the objective of an RL agent is to maximize these expected value objectives. The next two optimality equations form the basis of solving the control
problem in Reinforcement Learning as we discuss in the further sections.
Definition 8. The Bellman Optimality Equation for V ? (s) is given by
V ? (s) = max V π (s)

(12)

π

= max Q? (s, a)
a
X


= max
p(s0 , r|s, a) r + γV ? (s0 )
a

s0 ,r

Definition 9. The Bellman Optimality Equation for Q? (s, a) is given by
Q? (s, a) = max Qπ (s, a)
π


X
? 0 0
p(s0 , r|s, a) r + γ max
=
Q
(s
,
a
)
0

(13)

a

s0 ,r

An extensive discussion on MDPs is presented in [Dimitri, 2017].

3

Reinforcement Learning and Control

As seen previously in matrix form, finite MDPs have a unique solution for the
state-value and action-value functions. However, the runtime is prohibitive and
this section discusses the general frameworks for practical solutions.
The two classic iterative approaches to solve the Dynamic Programming problems
are known as the Value Iteration and Policy Iteration. These approaches are only
possible when the environment dynamics are known to the agent and in most
modern problems of relevance, that is not the case. Even when the environment
dynamics are known, if the state or action space grows very large, these tabular
methods will not be feasible. Hence, in the interest of brevity and space, this
approach has been omitted from discussion. Interested readers can refer [Sutton
and Barto, 1998].
In the absence of environment dynamics or a large state-action space, function
approximators are imperative. Most Reinforcement Learning techniques today
can be broadly classified into either approximation of the table of state and action
values, learning a policy distribution for each state or a mixture of the two. Since,
most of these methods require the calculation of expectation over the trajectories
induced by a policy, Monte Carlo (MC) methods are used to approximate the
expectation values.
10

3.1

Q-Learning

Q-Learning [Watkins and Dayan, 1992] has been one of the most influential methods in Reinforcement Learning. The objective here is to learn the action-value
function Qπ (s, a) for policy π by minimizing the expected loss L(θ).

h
i
L(θ) = Eπ (Qθ (s, a) − y)2

(14)

where y = r + γ max
Qθ0 (s0 , a0 ). y represents the Q-Learning target value. Since,
a0
the expectation is not directly computable, it is approximated by sampling a large
number of trajectories following a suitable coverage policy for exploration like
-greedy or Boltzmann exploration [Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2017].
Q-Learning in its vanilla form tends to be highly unstable especially in the form
where Deep Neural Networks are used for function approximation. Deep QLearning [Mnih et al., 2015] was proposed to overcome this problem by introducing the notion of target network whose parameters are kept constant for a finite number of training steps and is used to generate the values for y. The other
technique used to stabilize the performance and overcome the problem of catastrophic forgetting is to use an Experience Replay Buffer from which transitions
are sampled at random. This also helps break correlation between the sequential
transitions from trajectories generated by the policy π.

3.2

Policy Gradient Methods

Policy Gradient methods differ from Q-Learning in the sense that they explicitly
learn a stochastic policy distribution πθ parametrized by θ. One natural choice for
the objective here is to maximize the expected return over the trajectories induced
by the policy πθ . If we denote the reward of a trajectory τ generated by policy
πθ (τ) as r(τ)
Z

J(θ) = Eπθ [r(τ)] =
πθ (τ)r(τ)dτ
Z
∇J(θ) =
∇πθ (τ)r(τ)dτ
Z
=
πθ (τ)∇ log πθ (τ)r(τ)dτ


= Eπθ ∇ log πθ (τ)r(τ)
11

(15)
(16)

Now, the probability of generating the trajectory is
πθ (τ) = P(s0 )

T
Y

πθ (at |st )p(st+1 |st , at )

(17)

t=1

where P refers to the ergodic distribution of the MDP. In simple terms, it is the
probability of the agent being in some initial state. Taking the log and the gradient
reveals a surprisingly beautiful result

log πθ (τ) = log P(s0 ) +

T
X

log πθ (at |st ) + log p(st+1 |st , at )

(18)

i=1

∇ log πθ (τ) =

T
X

∇ log πθ (at |st )

i=1

  T


 X


=⇒ ∇J(θ) = Eπθ ∇  log πθ (at |st ) r(τ)
t=1

The gradient comes out to be independent of the environment dynamics and the
ergodic distribution. This means we can now just run Monte-Carlo simulations
and approximate the gradient to find the best parameters θ? and the computed
gradient is an unbiased estimator of the true gradient.
It should be further observed that the r(τ) term in the gradient remains effectively
uninfluenced during the gradient operation. Replacing r(τ) by Gt (discounted
returns from Definition 2) gives us the REINFORCE Algorithm [Williams, 1992].
This replacement is possible because rewards from the past cannot influence the
rewards in the future.

3.3

Actor-Critic Methods

The objective used in Policy Gradient Methods leads to very high variance models and part of the problem is aggravated by the scale of rewards. If observed
closely, the policy gradient is equivalent to a Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(MLE). Data overwhelms the prior. Any erratic trajectories which produce unusual rewards would cause an unexpected change in the resulting distribution. To
mitigate this problem, an idea that helps reduce the variance is to instead maximize an objective which keeps track of the relative reward difference. This leads
to an algorithm called REINFORCE with a Baseline by introducing a term in the
gradient which does not induce additional bias. Hence, the gradient becomes
12

  T


 X


∇J(θ) = Eπθ ∇  log πθ (at |st ) (Gt − b)

(19)

t=1

where b is the introduced baseline.
  T
  Z T
X
 X
 
Eπθ ∇  log πθ (at |st ) b =
πθ (at |st )∇ log πθ (at |st )bdτ
t=1

(20)

t=1

=

Z
∇

T
X

πθ (at |st )bdτ

t=1

=

Z

∇πθ (τ)bdτ
Z
= b∇ πθ (τ)dτ
= b∇1 = 0
The above calculations show that the addition of a baseline keeps the gradient estimate unbiased while decreasing the variance. Often, choosing the right baseline
is a challenge in itself and modern methods resolve to using another parametric
value function V ω (s) as the baseline which is commonly known as the “critic”. A
problem with the objective dicussed in 15 is that it might not be fully differentiable and hence we introduce a differentiable surrogate in the form of Q(s, a), the
action-value function. An extended treatment of Policy Gradient methods can be
found in [Sutton and Barto, 1998]. Recent methods like A3C [Mnih et al., 2016]
and PPO family of algorithms [Schulman et al., 2017] have been proposed to improve the stability of learned policies. The difference value of the the objective
and the baseline is also known as the advantage estimate.

3.4

Deterministic Policy Gradients

Instead of representing policies by a parametric probabilistic distribution πθ (a|s)
that stochastically selects actions a, this approach considers determinstic policies
of the form a = µθ (s). It turns out that the Determinstic Policy Gradient is a
limiting case of Stochastic Policy Gradients when the variance approaches zero
[Silver et al., 2014]. This approach has been shown to outperform Stochastic
Policy Gradients discussed earlier in high dimensional action spaces. Following a
similar approach as for Policy Gradients, the gradient expression is
13

i
h
∇θ J(µθ ) = E ∇θ µθ (s)∇a Qµ (s, a) a=µ (s)
θ

(21)

This result is surprising as well because this also does not depend on the environment dynamics. The policy is decided by solving the following maximization
problem.

µk+1 (s) = argmax Qµ (s, a)
k

(22)

a

However, this is computationally hard to do at each decision step. Instead, multiple gradients are averaged from multiple trajectories to reduce variance in the
estimate. This work has since been extended by [Lillicrap et al., 2015] to be more
stable by using the idea of Experience Replay Buffer and Target Network updates
to keep the target network constant for few gradient steps.

4

Challenges in Multi-Agent Environments

Section 2 and 3 provide a concise overview of modern techniques. However,
these have primarily been developed for the Single-Agent case. Before we see
extensions of these techniques to a Multi-Agent environment, it is imporant to
understand the various ways in which Multi-Agent Environments fall beyond the
direct scope of the control algorithms discussed above. Here is a non-exhaustive
list of challenges.

4.1

Joint Action Space

In its most general form, the MDPs can be extended as a framework for MultiAgent systems as a Markov Game [Littman, 1994]. The state transitions are controlled by the current state and one action from each agent. For an environment
with n agents

T : S × A1 × A2 × . . . × An → PD(S)
Ri : S × A 1 × A 2 × . . . × A n → R
πθi : S × A1 × A2 × . . . × An → [0, 1]
14

(23)
(24)
(25)

where PD(S) represents the probability distribution over the resultant state space.
As is apparent, all the routines above are now exponentially dependent on the
action space. Any decision made by the policy becomes immediately affected
by joint actions taken by all the actors and considering all of them becomes imperative to maximize the agent reward Ri . This is now computationally hard. A
concerning result by [Lowe et al., 2017] shows that for a simple setting of binary
actions, the probability of taking a gradient step in the correct direction decreases
exponentially with the number of agents. Formally

h
i
ˆ ∇Ji > 0 ∝ 0.5N
Pr h∇J,

(26)

where the agent’s policy is initialzed to an uninformed policy s.t. π(a = 1|s) = 0.5,
ˆ is the gradient estimate from a single sample.
N is the number of agents and ∇J

4.2

Game-Theoretic Effects

As we’ve noted earlier, every MDP has at least one optimal policy and of the
given optimal policies at least one is stationary and deterministic. However, for
many Markov games, as defined in Section 4.1, there is no deterministic optimal
policy that is undominated because it critically depends on the the behavior of
the opponent. The need for stochasticity arises from the agent’s uncertainty in its
opponent’s moves. An illustration for the point can be read in Box 4.2.

Figure 3: The matrix-game for “Rock, Paper, Scissors” [Littman, 1994]
While Single-Agent systems have a relatively strong theoretical foundation, a
thorough understanding of the learning problem in multi-agent settings is still
an open problem. The transient nature of dynamics in such a setting makes the
problem harder to analyze. [Shoham et al., 2007] strongly cautions to rely not too
strongly on requirements such as convergence to a Nash Equilibrium when evaluating learning algorithms in a multi-agent setting. Instead, Evolutionary Game
Theory is emerging as the preferred framework rather than classical game theory
and is surveyed in detail by [Bloembergen et al., 2015].
15

Box 4.2: Rock, Paper, Scissors
A mathematically convenient way to illustrate stochasticity in Multi-Agent
systems is to consider a zero-sum Markov game called “Rock, Paper, Scissors” with only one state, also called a Matrix game. The objective is to
maximize the expected reward. Ro,a represents the reward when agents
takes an action a and the opponent takes the action o. The game is shown
in Figure 3.
The linear constraints on the problem for expected rewards for a policy π
and total value pay-off V
πpaper − πscissors ≥ V
−πrock + πscissors ≥ V
πrock − πpaper ≥ V
πrock + πpaper + πscissors = 1

(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)

Linear Programming gives a solution for this as π = ( 31 , 13 , 13 ) and V = 0.
Hence, the optimal policy for the game is using the random strategy at best!
This can be concisely written in the maximin formulation as
V = max min
π

4.3

o

X

Ro,a πa

(31)

a

Credit Assignment and Lazy Agent Problem

The Credit Assignment Problem concerns with how the success of an overall system can be attributed to the various contributions of a systems components [Minsky, 1961]. In a Reinforcement Learning setup, it is already hard to attribute an
outcome to a particular action in history. With the extension to Multi-Agent settings, this problem increases in complexity mutlifold. It is extremely doubtful that
the signal presented by an outcome (e.g. a win or a loss) contains enough information to make this inference. The naive approach of equally dividing the outcome
reward to each of the agents seldom makes sense. Interested audience can find a
detailed discussion in [Sutton, 1984] and behavorial analysis with different reward
functions in [Balch, 1997].
Another phenomena which arises due to partial observability is called the “LazyAgent Problem” [Sunehag et al., 2017] which particularly can occur in Cooperative environments. Learning can fail when one of the agent becomes inactive
16

because when one agent learns a useful policy, the second agent can be discouraged from exploration so as to not affect the first agent’s performance.

4.4

Non-Markovian Nature of Environments

The Markov assumption is crucial in the current formulation of RL algorithms.
It provides a mathematically clean framework to approach the learning problem.
However, this assumption can be easily violated in the simplest of scenarios. Consider the simple case of an agent learning to find the shortest path from A to B.
In the unconstrained form, this problem is Markovian however, with a simple
addition of the constraint that no intermediate states can be revisited makes it
non-Markovian.
This problem was addressed using Recurrent Networks in [Schmidhuber, 1991] to
allow the state representation over sequences of state history. Modern treatment of
this problem has followed the same approach to build a hidden representation of
state sequence with Gated Neural Networks or Convolutional Neural Networks.

5

Decentralized Actor, Centralized Critic

In this section, we will take a look at recent approaches to solve the learning problem in Multi Agent settings. We will specifically focus on an appealing paradigm
of training Reinforcement Learning Systems for Multiple Agents known as Decentralized Actor, Centralized Critic. The core idea behind this paradigm is summarized in Figure 4.
As seen in Section 4, the action space in a Multi-Agent system grows exponentially with the number of agents. In many cases, learning becomes impossible
because of partial observability and communication constraints. This necessitates
the need of a decentralized policies which only depend on local observations of
the agents. Such a formulation naturally attenuates the problem of exponentially
growing joint action spaces.
These techniques are augmented in a laboratory setting via a centralized critic
which provides an indirect observation (possibly partial) of the complete global
state to each of the actors. This helps work around the constraint of inter-agent
communications. The primary theoretical foundation driving work in this region
is by an extension of MDPs known as the Decentralized Partially Observable
Markov Decison Processes (Dec-POMDPs). This framework uses a generalized
notion of states in the form of observations. The core idea is that an agent may
17

Figure 4: Overview of Multi-Agent Decentralized Actor, Centralized Critic approach [Lowe et al., 2017]
only be able to get information over a restricted horizon. A formal definition can
be found in [Oliehoek and Amato, 2016] with a much detailed discussion.
[Kraemer and Banerjee, 2016] present an approach where the agents are allowed
to rehearse with information that will not be available during policy execution
and also present weak convergence guarantees. Following suit, end-to-end Deep
architectures have been proposed recently.
One recent approach introduces a clever approach to estimate the advantage estimate by using a counterfactual baseline for policy gradients [Foerster et al., 2017]
as

Aa (s, u) = Q(s, u) −

X

πa (u0a |τa )Q(s, (u−a , u0a )

(32)

u0a

where the advantage estimate is computed for each agent and the baseline marginalizes out the actions (u) of an agent a. This allows the centralized critic to reason
about the counterfactuals in which only a’s actions change. The interactions between the environment and the actors are shown in Figure 5. h represents the
hidden state of the actors which are existent for the Gated Neural Networks to
account for the Non-Markovian nature of the environments. The training of this
network happens via the standard Actor-Critic approach as seen in Section 3.3.
Another approach applies the same paradigm to Q-Learning by proposing a new
objective for the supervised loss. The key idea is named QMIX [Rashid et al.,
2018] which exploits a linear decomposition of the joint value function across
18

Figure 5: Information Flow in COMA [Foerster et al., 2017]
agents by maintaining monotonicity in the local and global maximum value functions. The information flow is depicted via Figure 6.
∂Qtot
≥ 0 (for all agent’s Q-Networks)
∂Qa
X

L(θ) =
ytot
i − Qtot (τ, u, s; θ)

(33)
(34)

i

ytot
Qtot (τ0 , u0 , s0 ; θ− )
i = r + γ max
0
u

(35)

The “Mixing Network” component of the QMIX architecture in Figure 6 is the one
that enforces the monotonicity by taking absolute values of the weights generate
by an auxiliary hyper-network. The end-to-end training of this network happens
via the standard (Deep) Q-Learning framework as seen in Section 3.1.
By the transient nature of the environment which is critically dependent on the
behavior policies of other interacting agents in the environment, the training becomes highly unstable. [Lowe et al., 2017] propose to use an ensemble of policies
chosen from a pool at random at the start of each trajectory so that the agents are
robust to changes in the environment and uses Deterministic Policy Gradients as
the choice of training algorithm as discussed in Section 3.4.

5.1

Experiments with Pommerman

A large part of my work currently is about adapting the knowledge above to the
novel environment of Pommerman [pom, ]. The particular variant of the game I
19

Figure 6: Information Flow in QMIX [Rashid et al., 2018]
am interested in solving is the 2v2 variant where two autonomous agents team up
against another team of 2. The paradigm of Multi-Agent training seen above suits
exceptionally well to this environment.
My implementation is inspired by the QMIX architecture seen in Figure 6 where
the agents are being trained against a team of rule-based agents. An extensive
behavorial analysis of the algorithm and tests for robustness are still in progress.
It is also to be seen whether these agents can be paired up with novel teammates.

6

Future Work

A large set of problems still stay open in both the theoretical and applied aspects of
Reinforcement Learning Systems for Multi-Agent Systems. My immediate next
steps to empirically improve the performance described above will be to incorporate the idea of “competitive self-play” [Bansal et al., 2017] and “kickstarting”
agents from a pool of pre-trained agents [Schmitt et al., 2018]. I expect these
approaches to perform better than the current approach of training agents from
scratch. I am also optimistic about Dec-POMDPs to be the foundational theoretical framework behind Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning and will be exploring
this topic further.

20

Acknowlegements
I would like to thank Joan Bruna, Roberta Raileanu and Cinjon Resnick for insightful discussions and directions along the way.

References
[dee, ] Deepmind
ai
reduces
google
data
centre
cooling
bill
by
40
https://deepmind.com/blog/
deepmind-ai-reduces-google-data-centre-cooling-bill-40/.
[pom, ] Pommerman: AI research into multi-agent learning. https://www.
pommerman.com/.
[Agogino and Tumer, 2012] Agogino, A. K. and Tumer, K. (2012). A multiagent
approach to managing air traffic flow. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent
Systems, 24(1):1–25.
[Balch, 1997] Balch, T. (1997). Learning roles: Behavioral diversity in robot
teams. pages 7–12. AAAI.
[Bansal et al., 2017] Bansal, T., Pachocki, J., Sidor, S., Sutskever, I., and Mordatch, I. (2017). Emergent Complexity via Multi-Agent Competition. ArXiv
e-prints.
[Bellman, 1957] Bellman, R. (1957). Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 1 edition.
[Bloembergen et al., 2015] Bloembergen, D., Tuyls, K., Hennes, D., and Kaisers,
M. (2015). Evolutionary dynamics of multi-agent learning: A survey. J. Artif.
Int. Res., 53(1):659–697.
[Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2017] Cesa-Bianchi, N., Gentile, C., Lugosi, G., and Neu,
G. (2017). Boltzmann Exploration Done Right. ArXiv e-prints.
[DeJong and Jong, 2002] DeJong, K. A. and Jong, K. A. D. (2002). Evolutionary
Computation. The MIT Press.
[Dimitri, 2017] Dimitri, P. B. (2017). DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING AND OPTIMAL CONTROL. Athena Scientific.

21

[Foerster et al., 2017] Foerster, J., Farquhar, G., Afouras, T., Nardelli, N., and
Whiteson, S. (2017). Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.08926.
[Kraemer and Banerjee, 2016] Kraemer, L. and Banerjee, B. (2016). Multi-agent
reinforcement learning as a rehearsal for decentralized planning. Neurocomputing, 190:82–94.
[Leibo et al., 2017] Leibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V., Lanctot, M., Marecki, J., and
Graepel, T. (2017). Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning in Sequential Social
Dilemmas. ArXiv e-prints.
[Lillicrap et al., 2015] Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T.,
Tassa, Y., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. (2015). Continuous control with deep
reinforcement learning. ArXiv e-prints.
[Littman, 1994] Littman, M. L. (1994). Markov games as a framework for multiagent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International
Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’94,
pages 157–163, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
[Lowe et al., 2017] Lowe, R., Wu, Y., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. (2017). Multi-Agent Actor-Critic for Mixed Cooperative-Competitive
Environments. ArXiv e-prints.
[Matignon et al., 2012] Matignon, L., Jeanpierre, L., Mouaddib, A.-I., et al.
(2012). Coordinated multi-robot exploration under communication constraints
using decentralized markov decision processes.
[Minsky, 1961] Minsky, M. (1961). Steps toward artificial intelligence. Proceedings of the IRE, 49(1):8–30.
[Mnih et al., 2016] Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T.,
Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. (2016). Asynchronous methods
for deep reinforcement learning. In Balcan, M. F. and Weinberger, K. Q., editors, Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1928–1937,
New York, New York, USA. PMLR.
[Mnih et al., 2015] Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness,
J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski,
G., et al. (2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
Nature, 518(7540):529.

22

[Ng et al., 1999] Ng, A. Y., Harada, D., and Russell, S. J. (1999). Policy invariance under reward transformations: Theory and application to reward shaping.
In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’99, pages 278–287, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc.
[Oliehoek and Amato, 2016] Oliehoek, F. A. and Amato, C. (2016). A Concise
Introduction to Decentralized POMDPs. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 1st edition.
[Pipattanasomporn et al., 2009] Pipattanasomporn, M., Feroze, H., and Rahman,
S. (2009). Multi-agent systems in a distributed smart grid: Design and implementation. In 2009 IEEE/PES Power Systems Conference and Exposition,
pages 1–8.
[Rashid et al., 2018] Rashid, T., Samvelyan, M., Schroeder de Witt, C., Farquhar,
G., Foerster, J., and Whiteson, S. (2018). QMIX: Monotonic Value Function
Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. ArXiv e-prints.
[Salimans et al., 2017] Salimans, T., Ho, J., Chen, X., Sidor, S., and Sutskever, I.
(2017). Evolution Strategies as a Scalable Alternative to Reinforcement Learning. ArXiv e-prints.
[Schmidhuber, 1991] Schmidhuber, J. (1991). Reinforcement learning in markovian and non-markovian environments. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 500–506.
[Schmitt et al., 2018] Schmitt, S., Hudson, J. J., Zidek, A., Osindero, S., Doersch, C., Czarnecki, W. M., Leibo, J. Z., Kuttler, H., Zisserman, A., Simonyan,
K., and Eslami, S. M. A. (2018). Kickstarting Deep Reinforcement Learning.
ArXiv e-prints.
[Schulman et al., 2017] Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. (2017). Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms. ArXiv e-prints.
[Shoham et al., 2007] Shoham, Y., Powers, R., and Grenager, T. (2007). If multiagent learning is the answer, what is the question? Artif. Intell., 171(7):365–
377.
[Silver et al., 2014] Silver, D., Lever, G., Heess, N., Degris, T., Wierstra, D., and
Riedmiller, M. (2014). Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In Xing, E. P.
and Jebara, T., editors, Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 387–395, Bejing, China. PMLR.
23

[Sunehag et al., 2017] Sunehag, P., Lever, G., Gruslys, A., Czarnecki, W. M.,
Zambaldi, V., Jaderberg, M., Lanctot, M., Sonnerat, N., Leibo, J. Z., Tuyls,
K., and Graepel, T. (2017). Value-Decomposition Networks For Cooperative
Multi-Agent Learning. ArXiv e-prints.
[Sutton, 1984] Sutton, R. S. (1984). Temporal Credit Assignment in Reinforcement Learning. PhD thesis. AAI8410337.
[Sutton and Barto, 1998] Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. (1998). Introduction to
Reinforcement Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1st edition.
[Vinyals et al., 2017] Vinyals, O., Ewalds, T., Bartunov, S., Georgiev, P., Vezhnevets, A. S., Yeo, M., Makhzani, A., Küttler, H., Agapiou, J., Schrittwieser, J.,
et al. (2017). Starcraft ii: a new challenge for reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.04782.
[Watkins and Dayan, 1992] Watkins, C. J. C. H. and Dayan, P. (1992).
learning. Machine Learning, 8(3):279–292.

Q-

[Williams, 1992] Williams, R. J. (1992). Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. In Reinforcement Learning,
pages 5–32. Springer.

24

