1

Residual Q-Networks for Value Function
Factorizing in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

arXiv:2205.15245v1 [cs.LG] 30 May 2022

Rafael Pina, Varuna De Silva, Joosep Hook and Ahmet Kondoz, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) is
useful in many problems that require the cooperation and
coordination of multiple agents. Learning optimal policies using
reinforcement learning in a multi-agent setting can be very
difficult as the number of agents increases. Recent solutions such
as Value Decomposition Networks (VDN), QMIX, QTRAN and
QPLEX adhere to the centralized training and decentralized execution scheme and perform factorization of the joint action-value
functions. However, these methods still suffer from increased
environmental complexity, and at times fail to converge in a stable
manner. We propose a novel concept of Residual Q-Networks
(RQNs) for MARL, which learns to transform the individual Qvalue trajectories in a way that preserves the Individual-GlobalMax criteria (IGM), but is more robust in factorizing actionvalue functions. The RQN acts as an auxiliary network that
accelerates convergence and will become obsolete as the agents
reach the training objectives. The performance of the proposed
method is compared against several state-of-the-art techniques
such as QPLEX, QMIX, QTRAN and VDN, in a range of multiagent cooperative tasks. The results illustrate that the proposed
method, in general, converges faster, with increased stability and
shows robust performance in a wider family of environments. The
improvements in results are more prominent in environments
with severe punishments for non-cooperative behaviours and
especially in the absence of complete state information during
training time.
Index Terms—Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
value function factorization, deep learning, task cooperation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

R

EINFORCEMENT learning has been growing as one
of the most prominent areas of artificial intelligence
in the recent past [1]. It has proved to be successful in
single-agent tasks in diverse areas of application such as
finance, games, and manufacturing [2], [3]. There are many
applications that require reinforcement learning to be done in
Multi-Agent settings, which require some level of cooperation
and coordination among the agents [4].
In centralized Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL), observations and actions of all agents are
considered as a whole by a centralized oracle. However,
centralised learning suffers from Curse of Dimensionality
as the number of agents increases and the action space
becomes extremely large [5], [6]. On the other end of the
spectrum, fully decentralized MARL treats each agent as
an independent learner. However, learning in such a setting
becomes non-stationary from the perspective of a single
agent, and renders it difficult for an agent to understand the
reasons for the joint reward. As a result, the agent might get
confounded by the rewards of other agents. Thus, the optimal
policy may not be learnable in such settings. This problem is

Fig. 1: Illustration of the centralized training decentralized
execution paradigm within the proposed RQN method.

referred to as relative overgeneralization [7]. To minimize the
above problems, a new paradigm has been investigated for
MARL, known as the centralized training and decentralized
execution (CTDE). It allows the centralized critic to use the
full information available of the environment during training,
but restricts agents (actors) to their local observations when it
comes to execution. Most of the MARL methods proposed in
the recent past focus on the centralized training decentralized
execution scheme [8]–[11]. This paradigm helps to minimize
the relative overgeneralization problem by improving the
credit assignment to the agents, which helps agents to
appropriately deduce their individual contribution to the
overall team reward [9]. Yet, a fully centralized critic still
suffers from Curse of Dimensionality [12].
One possible approach to overcome the Curse of Dimensionality is to learn a centralized, but a factorized critic,
which learns to decompose the joint action-value function
to individual action-value functions of the agents. The Value
Decomposition Networks (VDN) [13] and QMIX [12], are two
examples of such techniques. VDN aims to learn an additive
decomposition of the joint action-value function. However, authors in [12] argue that the simple linear operations performed
by VDN limit the complexity of the value functions that it can
represent. QMIX tries to extend the range of value functions
that can be represented by mixing the individual Q-values
in a monotonic way. However, VDN and QMIX are limited
by additivity and monotonicity constraints, respectively, and
are unable to factorize action-value functions that do not
follow these constraints. [14] proposed QTRAN, a solution
capable of overcoming these problems by using a better
factorization process. The main idea of QTRAN is to transform
the original action-value function into a new one, and factorize
the transformed function. Despite the many solutions brought
by these methods, there are still problems to tackle that have
been mitigated but not totally overcome yet such as the credit
assignment problem [15].

2

In this paper we show that there exists a more relaxed
condition than in QTRAN [14] under which value function
factorization is possible. Accordingly, we propose a new deep
learning based method that aims to learn factorizations of
the action-value functions in different tasks by performing
complex non-linear operations over the individual Q-values.
We propose the use of a new Residual Q-Network (RQN)
(Figure 1) that will allow to reduce the impact of the credit
assignment problem [15], [16]. In order to achieve that, the
RQN will learn an individual factor for each agent that will
indicate the relative importance of a certain Q-value trajectory
(the sequence of action-values of a given episode). As a
result, the proposed method is able to also improve the credit
assignment of the agents and achieve a quick and stable level
of optimal performance over time by learning estimations for
the individual Q-values. The main role of the RQN is to learn
estimations for the individual Q-values in order to coax the
agents towards optimal performances. The intuition is that
if individual agents are performing well by visiting certain
states with relatively high Q-values, they should be encouraged
to visit those states in subsequent episodes. To do that,
the proposed model should take advantage of the individual
Q-value trajectories. The empirical results suggest that the
proposed approach is affected less by increasing the number
of agents, when compared to previous value decompositionbased methods. The performance of the proposed method is
benchmarked against previous related approaches (QMIX [12],
QTRAN [14], VDN [13], QPLEX [17] and WQMIX [18])
in a set of cooperative multi-agent environments of varying
complexity. Contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) We present novel theoretical evidence for factorization
conditions in a wider family of different environments.
2) We propose a new method for value function factorization in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning cooperative
tasks that uses a novel neural network architecture based
on a novel concept of Residual Q-Networks (RQNs).
3) We demonstrate the viability of the proposed method
in a diverse set of environments with varying levels of
complexity, with distinct tasks and number of agents.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section
II we present recent literature that is associated with the
contributions of this paper, and section III presents the theoretical details fundamental to the developments of this paper.
Section IV presents the proposed novel value factorization
methodology for MARL tasks. In section V, experimental
details are presented, followed by results and discussions
in section VI. We conclude the paper in section VII with
indications for future work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
[19] introduced one of the first Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning approaches, based on independent Q-learning [20].
In a more complex but related approach, [21] extended the
concept with Deep Q-Networks to multi-agent environments,
where individual agents controlled by Independent Deep QNetworks learn both cooperative and competitive behaviours.
Deep reinforcement learning for multi-agent settings
quickly became popular, but the increase of the number of

agents proved to be a difficult problem to solve. To mitigate
this problem, a recurring approach in recent works is the use of
a centralized training and decentralized execution model [5].
COMA [9] is an example of an actor-critic centralized training
decentralized execution method that uses a centralized critic
to estimate values for state-action pairs and a decentralized
actor that maps states to actions. Other recent works also
follow this paradigm such as [8], [16] or [18]. Methods such
as QMIX [12], VDN [13], QTRAN [14] and QPLEX [17] also
adhere to the centralized training and decentralized execution
approach. Moreover, they aim to learn a factorization for the
centralized critic, which proved to be a successful strategy.
Further, these methods employ a parameter sharing approach
to improve learning efficiency [10]. However, VDN and QMIX
are constrained by additivity and monotonicity, respectively
[14]. In addition, methods like QMIX, QPLEX or QTRAN
take advantage of the global state of the environment, which
can be unfeasible under certain conditions. On the side, works
such as [22] use similar approaches together with an idea of
task decomposition to improve the learning performance.
Communication-based approaches are also popular in multiagent scenarios [2], [8], [23], [24]. A key difference of this
family of algorithms from fully decentralized execution, is that
the agents can communicate among themselves during the
execution process. Multiple different works proved that this
model can be effective. [25] proposes an algorithm where the
agents learn to coordinate by performing multiple rounds of
communication among themselves before taking an action in
the environment. Also, [23] demonstrate interesting results by
showing that a group of agents is capable of learning complex
communication protocols during centralized training phase, to
solve cooperative tasks with communication during execution
time.
The proposed work in this paper is a new method that
follows a centralized training and decentralized execution
model for cooperative scenarios. Accordingly, it falls in the
category of VDN, QMIX, QTRAN and QPLEX where an
effective decomposition of the joint action-value function is
learnt. In section III we elaborate on the theoretical details of
these methods.
III. BACKGROUND
We consider a set of fully cooperative tasks that can be
represented as Decentralized Partially Observable Markov
Decision Processes (Dec-POMDP) [26]. A Dec-POMDP is
an extension of a Markov Decision Process to a multi-agent
setting where the environment is not fully perceptible by
each agent. Let the tuple G= hS, A, R, O, Z, P, N , γi be the
representation of a Dec-POMDP, where S is a set of states
s that represent the current state of the environment. For
each agent i ∈ N ≡{1, . . . ,N } consider A to be the set
of actions ai that each agent can choose at a given time
step t, ai ∈A : A={a1 , . . . ,an } and R(s, a) : S × A → R
and O(s, i) : S × N → Z are the reward and observation
functions, respectively. The reward function is shared by all
the agents and Z represents the model of observations. The
discount factor of the reward function is represented by γ :

3

γ ∈ [0, 1]. Since we consider a partially observable system,
each agent receives a local observation oi from the model O.
Furthermore, each agent i holds an action-observation history
represented by τi so that τi ∈T ≡ (Z × A)∗ → {τ1 , . . . , τN }.
A transition of state in the environment is performed according
to the probability function P (s0 |s, a) : S × A × S → [0, 1],
where s0 represents the state that follows s after taking
an action a. This constructs a certain policy πi (ai |τi ). The
objective is to find an optimal joint policy π that maximizes the
joint action-value
function Qπ (st , at ) = Eπ [Rt |st , at ], where
P∞
Rt = k=0 γ k Rt+k is the discounted return.
In this section, we introduce the key concepts to understand
the method proposed in this paper.
A. Reinforcement Learning with Deep Q-Networks
In the work of [27], Deep Q-Networks (DQN) is an approach that uses deep neural networks to approximate valuefunctions Q(s, a). This is done using a target network, whose
parameters are copied every n steps from an evaluation network, where n is a pre-defined number of steps to update the
target network. Furthermore, the networks have access to a
buffer with an observation-action history used to train them.
In Deep Q-Learning the loss of the networks is calculated
according to
2

L (θ) = [y DQN − Q (s, a; θ)]
DQN

(1)

DQN

where y
is the DQN target network, y
= R(s, a) +
γmaxa0 Q(s0 , a0 ; θ− ) , and θ and θ− represent the parameters
of the evaluation network and target, respectively.
B. Value Function Factorization in Centralized TrainingDecentralized Execution Based MARL
Under the centralized training decentralized execution
paradigm, recent studies defined a key condition that should
be satisfied to enable efficient learning during the centralized
training phase. This condition is called Individual-Global-Max
(IGM) [14] and is defined as


argmaxa1 Q1 (τ1 , a1 )


..
argmax Qtot (τ, a) = 
(2)

.
a

argmaxaN QN (τN , aN )

In simple terms, we can describe this property as requiring
the optimal joint action to be the same as the combination of
locally optimal actions of individual agents.
Value Decomposition Networks [13] is a method that aims
to learn an additive decomposition over individual agents
based on the team reward. The key idea is the assumption
that a joint action-value function of a group of agents can be
represented as the addition of individual action-value functions
of each agent. In simple terms, this method decomposes the
action-value function according to
Qtot (τ, a) =

N
X

Qi (τi , ai ;θi )

(3)

i=1

where Qtot is the joint action-value function and Qi represents
the individual value functions for each agent i with parameters

θi . However, it is argued that this type of decomposition is too
simple to represent a wide range of environments due to the
additivity constraint [12], [14].
QMIX is a method that learns a more complex decomposition of the joint action-value function using hyper networks
that take advantage of extra state information during centralized training [12]. The decomposition is done using a mixing
network that uses complex non-linear operations that follow
an imposed monotonicity constraint, represented as
∂Qtot
≥ 0, ∀i
(4)
∂Qi
The motivation for this monotonicity constraint is to generalize the family of functions that VDN can represent to a
larger family of monotonic functions. This condition is assured
by keeping the weights of the mixing network positive. This
constraint has proved to be a problem when it comes to solving
tasks that do not meet the monotonicity conditions [14], [18].
For example, a task where the best action of one agent depends
on the actions of a second agent, at the same time step. We
demonstrate this effect using a matrix game in subsection
IV-C. To update their networks, both VDN and QMIX use
the DQN loss as stated in (1), but their losses operate on Qtot
instead of an individual Q of DQN.
QTRAN [14] is a different value-decomposition approach
that proposes a new method of factorizing joint action-value
functions without the constraints imposed by VDN and QMIX:
additivity and monotonicity. The key idea of QTRAN is to
transform the original action-value function using an additive decomposition, and then to correct it by using a joint
state-dependent value function. To address the additivity and
monotonicity constraints present in VDN and QMIX, QTRAN
proposes a new approach that uses multiple networks that
are trained in a centralized way. QTRAN uses an individual action-value network for each agent i, fq : (τi , ai )7→Qi ,
a joint action-value network, fr : (τ, a)7→Qtot , and a statevalue network, fv :τ 7→Vtot . In this sense, QTRAN uses a
weighted loss that aims to both learn the optimal Qtot and
factorize the transformed action-value function. The use of an
unconstrained joint action-value function is key to keep a wide
representational complexity. With the method proposed in this
paper, we also intend to eliminate both the additivity and the
monotonicity constraints by adding more layers of complexity
to the decomposition procedure. This process will be explained
in the sections ahead.
C. Value Mapping in Residual Networks
ResNets was proposed by [28] as a novel approach for
image recognition. The key to these networks is the existence
of skip connections that allow values to skip some layers in the
network. Similarly the work in this paper introduces a novel
architecture for MARL with the existence of skip connections.
The works of [28] show the strength of such architecture that
proves to be easier to optimize than previous networks.
In a Residual Network, the computations performed to map
subsequent values are obtained through the equation [29]
xU = xu +

U
−1
X
i=u

F (xi , wi )

(5)

4

where F is a non-linear function with inputs x, parameterized
by w, and xU are the features of a deeper unit U and xu are
the features of a shallower unit u.
IV. R ESIDUAL Q-N ETWORK (RQN) FOR VALUE
F UNCTION FACTORIZATION
The proposed method involves a centralized, but a factorized
critic network supplemented by a novel Residual Q-Network
(RQN). In this section we show a more relaxed factorization
condition that suits a wider family of joint action-value functions. With the proposed new network architecture, we aim to
exploit this condition.
A. Requirements for Factorization with Individual Factor
Functions
We start by defining a Theorem over the Theorem 1 of
value function factorization in [14], which defines sufficient
conditions to satisfy IGM in (2).
Theorem 1. Given a joint action-value function Qtot (τ, a),
we say that it is factorized by [Qi (τi , ai )] if

N
X
0
a = a, (6a)
(Qi (τi , ai ) + φi (τ )) − Qtot (τ, a) =
≥ 0 a 6= a, (6b)
i=1
where
φi are the individualPcorrection factors and
PN
N
φ
(τ ) = maxa Qtot (τ, a) − i=1 Qi (τi , ai ).
i
i=1
Accordingly, we utilize a transformation
PN of individual
action-value functions that preserve IGM, i=1 (Qi (τi , ai ) +
φi (τ )). This is an affine transformation of the individual factor
functions, under which the IGM condition is not violated. This
is a much stricter condition than additivity constraint of VDN
and monotonicity constraint of QMIX [14]. Note that this
transformation also shares some theoretical similarities with
the individual dueling transformation introduced in QPLEX
[17]. However, RQN learns a trajectory-based factor and
uses this factor to transform the individual Qi while in the
transformation of QPLEX, the authors use advantage functions
together with the state-value functions.
Proof. Theorem 1 shows that if the above condition holds,
then Qi satisfies IGM. In a similar manner to [14], we show
that if there is a Qi that satisfies the conditions above, then
the joint action that maximizes the Qtot is the same as the
set of optimal local actions a = [ai ]N
i=1 , where ai denotes an
optimal local action of the agent i, ai = argmaxai Qi (τi , ai ).
We have that

Qtot (τ, a) =
=
≥

N
X
(Qi (τi , ai ) + φi (τ ))
i=1
N
X

N
X

i=1
N
X

i=1
N
X

i=1

i=1

(Qi (τi , ai )) +
(Qi (τi , ai )) +

≥ Qtot (τ, a)

f rom (6a)

φi (τ )

B. Factorizing with Residual Q-Networks
In this section, we propose a deep reinforcement learning
method that exploits Theorem 1. Our motivation is to achieve
an effective decomposition by learning a new estimation factor
that will affine transform the individual Q-value trajectories
Qi (τi , ai ). A different factor φi (τ ) is learnt for each agent, so
that we can prioritize different state-action trajectories taken
by agents within an episode.
The proposed architecture for the centralized critic is illustrated in Figure 2. The individual agent networks are recurrent
neural networks using a GRU with width 64. These networks
receive the observations oi from the agents at a given time
step and will output individual action-values based on the
observation-action histories. These values are passed on to the
RQN, where a set of non-linear operations are performed. Over
a batch of episodes, an estimation network (within the RQN)
will take as input features the mean of the Q-values of each
agent over the steps of each episode, and their maximum Qvalue. This estimation network has an input shape of 2 × N ,
where N is the number of agents. The inputs are given to a
Linear layer with 64 units, followed by a ReLU non-linearity
and finally another Linear layer, where the output has size
equal to N . In other words, the output is a set with N
estimation factors, one for each agent. The estimation factors
are added to the initial action-values from the individual agent
networks, to compute the adjusted individual Q-values. The
adjusted Q-values are given as inputs to the summing network,
to calculate the joint action-value function.
We denote estimation factor, by which the individual Qvalues are adjusted, as φi for each agent i : i∈{1, . . . ,N }.
This factor is the output of the RQN. Learning this factor
successfully is the first aspect of the proposed method. The
network is trained by receiving two features for each agent,
one being the mean of the Q-values across all the steps t :
t ∈ {1, . . . , T } of each episode e,
PT
Qt (st , at )
xei = t=0 i i i
(7)
T
and the second is the maximum Q-value of each agent across
all the steps of each episode e,
mei = max Qti (sti , ati )
t

The intuition to include the maximum as a feature to the
estimation network (see Figure 2) is that if the trajectory of
an agent contains a relatively high value state-action pair, it
should be encouraged to explore it in subsequent episodes.
Further, mean value of a trajectory signals the relative goodness of an entire trajectory and maximum value will signify the
goodness of some points within the trajectory. The estimation
factor for each agent and an episode e can be calculated
according to
φi = f ([xei ], [mei ]; θ)i ,

φi (τ )
f rom (6b)

This means that the set of optimal local actions a maximizes
Qtot , i.e., Qi satisfies IGM. End of Proof.

(8)

i ∈ {1, . . . , N }

(9)

where f represents the RQN with parameters θ. This estimation factor, which is a non-linear function of the actionvalue trajectories, allows to decompose action-value functions
of more complex environments than VDN due to the elimination of the simple sum constraint [12]. Furthermore, the

5

Fig. 2: Architecture of the centralized critic where the RQN is described in detail considering an example with two agents, 1
and 2, and for a certain episode e.

factorization procedure of the proposed method can benefit
from the trajectories of the individual Q-values. In contrast
to QMIX, the RQN based method removes the monotonicity
constraint by not enforcing the weights of the network to
remain positive. In comparison to QTRAN, where the statevalue network computes a single value for Qtot , the RQN
calculates an estimation factor for each individual Q-values
separately.
After the estimation factor for each agent is calculated by
the network, the factor is added to the respective Q-value
trajectories resulting in a new estimated Q-value for each agent
i, according to Q+
i = Qi + φi , where φi is obtained from (9).
At this point, we have learned an estimated version of the
Q-values for each agent, the estimated Q-values, denoted by
Q+
i . Now, the critic network can be used to compute a new
joint action-value function using the estimated Q-values,
Q+
tot =

N
X

Q+
i (τi , ai ; θi )

(10)

i=1

The proposed method is capable of learning a decomposition more capable of factorizing different factorizable tasks
than previous methods due to the use of a RQN. As described
in (5) consider now that H (Qi ) = F (x)+Qi gives the output
e
of the RQN. Recalling (7) and (8), consider that x = (xi , mei )
is a set containing the inputs for an agent i and an episode e
to the estimation network of our model (Figure 2). Consider
the example where the optimal output of the RQN given this
input Qi would be H (Qi ) = Qi . This would be difficult to
approximate using the normal mapping of a common neural
network [28], since by inputting Qi then it would need to be
optimally mapped to Qi after going through the network. On
the other hand, if we can compute a value F (x) given the input
x as a combination of features regarding the original input to
the RQN, and F being the estimation network, then we end up
with a factor φi (as represented in (9)) given by F (x) = φi
that will converge to a stable value when the training objective
is reached, since at that point, the role of the RQN as an
auxiliary network is no longer needed. We investigate this
effect further in subsection VI-D. Thus, H (Qi ) = F (x) + Qi

will be easier to learn with the RQN than with a common
neural network since F (x) stabilizes and Qi skips connections
as described in III-C.
C. Comparison of Representational Capacity of RQN with
QTRAN, VDN and QMIX
For this demonstration, let Qjt represent a joint action-value
function. The key idea of QTRAN is to transform the original
joint action-value function Qjt into a new one Q0jt that shares
the optimal joint action with Qjt . Theorem 1 in QTRAN
[14] states a sufficient condition for [Qi ] that satisfies IGM,
i∈{1, . . . ,N }. Accordingly, a factorizable joint action value
function Qjt (τ, a) is factorized by [Qi (τi , ai )], if
N
X


Qi (τi , ai ) − Qjt (τ, a) + Vjt (τ ) =

i=1

where Vjt = maxa Qjt (τ, a) −
of optimal local actions ai .

0
≥0

a = a, (11a)
a 6= a, (11b)

PN

i=1 Qi (τi , ai ) and a is a set

The above condition becomes necessary under an affine
transformation of action-value functions, ψ = A · Q + B,
N ×N
where A = [aii ] ∈ R+
is a symmetric diagonal matrix
N
and B = [bi ] ∈ R . An important observation is that values
of B does not alter the IGM condition. Thus, QTRAN relies
on a linear P
transformation of individual factor functions,
N
Q0jt (τ, a) =
i=1 Qi (τi , ai ), a transformation that contains
IGM. Thus, the transformation used in QTRAN is an identity
matrix.
The representational power of QTRAN over VDN relies
on the Vjt (τ ), which tries to learn the difference (or the
residual) between the joint action-value function Qjt (τ, a) and
the transformation at individually optimal actions Q0jt (τ, a).
Thus Vjt (τ ), is a residual function, that acts on top of the
transformation.
In comparison, the proposed RQN, relies on an affine
transformation, on individual factor functions. Thus, giving
more flexibility for learning the individual maximums, while

6

retaining the IGM property beyond additivity and monotonicity constraints.
In comparison to QTRAN, the transformation adopted by
RQN is as follows, where φi are individual correction factors:
Q0jt =

N
X

(Qi (τi , ai ) + φi (τ ))

(12)

i=1

In comparison to QTRAN, the
difference with
Prepresentational
N
VDN, in RQN comes from i=1 φi .
The success of the proposed RQN structure is due to the
difference in calculating the residual factors. In QTRAN, the
authors rely on the joint action value function Qtot (τ, a), to
learn the residual between transformation, whereas in RQN
we rely on a transformation that adheres to the sufficient
conditions of IGM as much as QTRAN, but the learning
problem is formulated to finding the individual maximums.
To further illustrate the differences in the representational
complexities of the different approaches, we show the reconstructions of the Qtot in a one-step matrix game, as used in
[14] and [18]. In this simple game, two agents can choose
one of three different actions in order to optimize a joint
action, given by Qtot . The matrix of the game is a nonmonotonic matrix represented by Table Ia. The agents are
trained for 20000 episodes (1-step episodes) in full exploration
( = 1) and with a replay buffer of size 500. Tables Ib-Ie
show the reconstructed Qtot for VDN, QMIX, QTRAN and
RQN, respectively. As the tables show, only QTRAN and RQN
are capable of sucessfuly reconstructing this non-monotonic
matrix, whereas VDN and QMIX fail. This supports the
fact that RQN can represent a wider family of action-value
functions, eliminating constraints such as monotonicity or
additivity.
TABLE I: Payoff matrix of the one-step game and reconstructed Qtot for VDN, QMIX, QTRAN, and RQN.
a0 \a1
A
B
C

A
8
-12
-12

B
-12
0
0

C
-12
0
0

(a) Payoff matrix
a0 \a1
A
B
C

A
-7.50
-5.70
-4.97

B
-5.72
-3.91
-3.19

C
-5.18
-3.37
-2.65

a0 \a1
A
B
C

(b) VDN
a0 \a1
A
B
C

A
7.97
-12.00
-11.99

B
-12.00
0.00
0.00

A
-7.55
-7.55
-7.55

B
-7.55
-0.01
-0.01

C
-7.55
-0.01
-0.01

(c) QMIX
C
-11.99
0.00
0.00

a0 \a1
A
B
C

(d) QTRAN

A
8.00
-11.99
-11.99

B
-12.00
0.00
0.00

C
-12.00
0.00
0.00

(e) RQN

D. Training the Residual Q-Network
Similar to the description of DQN as in (1), the networks
that we use during learning are trained to minimize the TD
loss that is now generalized for Q+
tot as
h
i
2
Lb (θb ) = E (ybtot − Q+
, b ∈ {1, . . . , B} (13)
tot (τ, a; θ))

Fig. 3: Representation of the matrix environments used in
the experiments [30]. On the top, from the left to the right:
PredatorPrey 2, PredatorPrey 4, Combat. On the bottom, from
the left to the right: Checkers, Switch.

Fig. 4: Representation of the Starcraft II environments used
in the experiments. From the left to the right: 8m, 3s5z,
3s5z vs 3s6z.
where B is the number of batches sampled from the replay
buffer and ybtot = R+γmaxa0 Qtot (τ 0 , a0 ; θ− ) is the target for
an iteration b, where θ− represents the parameters of the target
network. This loss is propagated firstly through the entire
evaluation network and then through the RQN. As such, the
targets and the evaluation values are calculated in a slightly
different way. The target network is based on Qtot instead
of Q+
tot . In other words, the target network of the proposed
architecture is based on the output of a VDN network, Qtot ,
as described previously in subsection III-B. The motivation
for this is that by keeping a separate set of targets, we can
approximate them with successively minimized losses due to
our estimation factor. The RQN will eventually reach a state
where it is no more needed since the Q-values will be optimal
and stable. At that point, it will render itself obsolete. (this
is a key difference of the proposed RQN from ResNets [28]).
Thus, the RQN acts as an auxiliary acceleration network that
will encourage the agents to converge quickly, by aiding the
decomposition of the joint action-value function.
V. E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS1
A. Details on the Environments Used
The performance of the proposed method is evaluated in
four different matrix environments with distinct objectives and
Starcraft II (SC2) [31] (Figure 4). The maps of the first set
of environments are 2D matrices (Figure 3) where the action
space is discrete, and the observation space is continuous. This
set of environments was chosen since similar versions of them
were used in previous works such as QTRAN [14] and VDN
[13]. Note that in the described environments, the individual
1 Code at https://github.com/rafaelmp2/residual-q-net

7

rewards attributed are then summed up to form a shared team
reward.
Switch: two agents start in opposite cells of the map,
separated by a narrow corridor and must switch positions.
This environment helps to evaluate how the agents react to
a delayed reward scheme. Checkers: on a map with apples
and lemons, the agents must eat all the existing apples on the
map and avoid lemons. For that, the agents need to cooperate
to maximize the team reward. PredatorPrey: a group of
predators must catch a group of moving prey. There is a step
penalty of -0.01 and every time one of the prey is caught,
each agent in the team receives a reward of +5. At least two
agents are needed to catch one prey. Two different versions
of this environment are used: one where there are 2 predators
and 1 prey and in the other, there are 4 predators and 2 prey.
These are referred to as PredatorPrey 2 and PredatorPrey 4,
respectively. Since this environment only has a success reward
and no significant intermediate penalties, the task remains
monotonic [14]. Combat: a team of five agents must learn
to cooperate to eliminate all the agents of the enemy team.
SC2: to complement our experiments we used environments
from the challenging Starcraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC)
set of environments [31]. The maps used are the 8m, 3s5z,
3s5z vs 3s6z, all with 8 agents. The level of difficulty was
set to very difficult (level 7).
B. Algorithms Used as Benchmarks
The performance of the proposed method is benchmarked
against other related approaches using the average episode
reward as metric. The agents are trained for a different number
of episodes depending on the complexity of the environment,
each in 3 independent runs starting at different random seeds.
During training time, at every 100 episodes, the model performance is evaluated by running 20 episodes and by averaging
the joint rewards for each episode. The proposed approach is
compared against VDN [13], QMIX [12], QTRAN-base [14],
QPLEX [17] and Weighted QMIX (WQMIX) [18]. The width
of the hidden layers is 32 for QMIX and 64 for RQN and
the other methods, as described in the respective papers. The
rest of the hyperparameters used in the main experiments are
summarized in II.
VI. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
In this section we present now the results of the experiments
described in the previous section. We start by discussing the
results in the matrix environments and analyse the stability
of the learning process. Then we discuss the results in the
Starcraft II environments and finally we present additional
results to analyse the algorithm performance.
A. Performance in Matrix Environments
Figure 5 illustrates the evolution of the performance of the
proposed Residual Q-Network (abbreviated as RQN) and the
benchmarked methods. The curves represent the smoothed
average rewards over the episodes (smoothed with a 10step cumulative moving average). For the Switch environment

(Figure 5e), RQN and WQMIX methods manage to solve
the task in a small amount of time. Considering that this
is a task with delayed rewards, this enforces the intuition
that the proposed RQN method encourages the agents to
prefer promising states once they are explored. In other words,
since the agents do not receive intermediate information about
whether their actions are good or not, once they get to the goal,
the proposed method encourages them to visit that state again
successively, which explains the stability once an optimal state
is achieved, making RQN method outperform VDN over time.
In the additional experiments subsection it will be clearly
illustrated the concept of stability. VDN and QPLEX also
solves this task, but are unable to do it in the same amount
of time as the previous, while QMIX and QTRAN-base fail
to solve it.
The results in 5a show that the RQN method can solve
a complex non-monotonic task like Checkers successfully.
Furthermore, we can see that it is capable of maintaining a
stable performance over time once it learns to solve the task.
In comparison, although QMIX, VDN, QPLEX QTARN-base
and WQMIX manage to solve the task, they fail to achieve as
high rewards and stable performance as RQN.
Analysing the performances obtained for two versions of
PredatorPrey, all the proposed methods can achieve optimal
rewards. In PredatorPrey 2 (Figure 5b), all the evaluated
methods are able to maintain a stable optimal reward over
time. Moreover, since this is a monotonic task, QMIX can
solve it successfully as it was expected. However, when the
number of agents is increased and hence the complexity of
the environment, in PredatorPrey 4 (Figure 5c) we observe
a different scenario. Despite all the methods being capable of
achieving an high value, VDN shows an unexpected behaviour
in this task with a notable decrease of performance after
around 5000 episodes of training. We believe this happens
because the agents get confused due to the exploration activities of the other agents. With the proposed method we aim to
solve this problem by improving the credit assignment of the
agents and consequently reducing the relative overgeneralization. The results suggest that this problem does not incur in
RQN. Surprisingly, QTRAN-base and WQMIX stay slightly
below the other methods, while QPLEX also solves this task
successfully achieving high rewards. However, RQN can still
maintain a higher and more consistent performance. Combat
is the exception to the described pattern in the previous
environments, where RQN stays below the performance of
VDN or WQMIX in the final training steps. On the other hand,
QTRAN-base fails to solve this environment and as expected,
since this task is not monotonic, QMIX also fails to solve it.
B. Stability of Performance in the Learning Process
In Figure 5 we can identify a pattern in all the environments
(with the slight exception of Combat) where RQN shows a
stable result in the reward over time, opposing to the other
methods. Although most of them are able to solve the tasks,
they fail to achieve as high values as RQN and show a lack
of stability over time, due to high variance of the rewards
obtained and to failing to consistently achieve an optimal

8

Fig. 5: Smoothed average rewards for the experimented methods in the matrix environments. The bold area represents the 95%
confidence intervals.

Fig. 6: Smoothed average rewards in the attempted Starcraft II environments. The bold area represents the 95% confidence
intervals.

reward. While RQN is able to maintain the performance
achieving high rewards over time, we can see that the other
methods keep decaying. In Switch, RQN is also the only
one able to maintain a stable performance over time. We call
this effect the stability of the learning process. We believe
the exceptions with Combat are due to the complexity of the
environment allied to its very delayed rewards. Generally, in
Figure 5 it is possible to see that RQN displays a very reduced
number of oscillations when the convergence (learning goal)
was achieved. This is a key difference from the other methods
that fail to maintain a stable performance, even when the
learning objective is achieved. Observing now PredatorPrey 4
(Figure 5c), we can see that QMIX achieves high performance
but shows it to be very unstable over time in this four-agent
task. This observation suggests that, although the task being
monotonic, QMIX fails to scale with the increase in the
number of agents. In comparison to QPLEX, although it is
capable of maintaining optimal and stable values over time, the
proposed RQN method can achieve the same optimal values

and, at the same time, shows improved level of stability.
C. Performance in Starcraft II Environments
Figure 6 illustrates the average rewards in the SC2 environments (smoothed with a 10-step cumulative moving average).
The corresponding win rates can be found in the Appendix
A. Although RQN may not outperform the other methods
in this set of environments, it shows to be competitive.
In the attempted maps, like the majority of the compared
methods, RQN can learn the 3s5z and 8m tasks and also
show competitive performance in the 3s5z vs 3s6z, although
none of them is able to solve the last. Comparing to QTRANbase RQN can still stay above in the last two tasks. These
results, linked to the previous in figures 5, support the fact
that RQN can perform in a wide family of environments due
to its relaxed factorization.
Overall, we can see that QTRAN could not learn a good
factorization for Combat and Switch environments. QMIX and
VDN also fail when monotonicity and additivity are not met,

9

TABLE II: Hyperparameters used in the experiments in section VI.
HYPERPARAMETER

VALUE

DESCRIPTION

BATCH SIZE
BUFFER SIZE
INITIAL 
MINIMUM 
 ANNEAL STEPS

32
5000
1
0.05
50000

NUMBER OF SAMPLES AT EACH TRAINING STEP
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SAMPLES TO STORE IN THE BUFFER
STARTING VALUE FOR 
FINAL VALUE FOR 
NUMBER OF STEPS THAT  TAKES TO DECAY

Fig. 7: Estimation factors learned by the RQN over time for
the two agents in PredatorPrey 2.

respectively [14]. When compared to QPLEX and WQMIX,
the results suggest that RQN is capable of learning tasks with
high performance in a more variate number of environments.
More specifically, RQN proves to be competitive in the SC2
environments attempted, linked to a superior performance in
the tasks illustrated in Figure 5. This suggests that RQN can
learn a more variate number of different environments, and
specially in the absence of extra state information during
training. Methods that use a relaxed factorization like RQN
and QTRAN might not perform as well in environments such
as SC2 [17]. However, a good relaxation proves to be very
effective in environments where non-cooperative behaviours
are punished more severely [14], such as the ones in Figure
5. The results in Figures 5 and 6 confirm that, with a more
relaxed factorization, RQN can factorize a wider family of
environments, even when compared to QTRAN that also uses
a relaxed and unconstrained factorization.
D. RQN Self-Depreciation and Task Monotonicity
In this subsection, additional experiments on the algorithm
performance are presented to complement the main results in
section VI.
1) Estimation Factors Learned by the RQN: Figure 7,
illustrates the estimation factors learned by the RQN over
time in the PredatorPrey 2 environment. It is possible to see
that it learns an estimation factor over time, and when the
performance objectives are reached, the estimation factor for
each agent converges to a stable value. Once it reaches the
stable value, the purpose of RQN as an auxiliary network
that assists in value factorization becomes obsolete. We call
this effect the self-depreciation of the RQN when the training
objective is reached.
Figure 8 shows the same metric for the PredatorPrey 4 environment (with 4 agents). This environment is more complex
due to the increased number of agents. Thus, although we can
see the estimation factor clearly converging for agents 1 and

Fig. 8: Estimation factors learned by the RQN over time for
the four agents in PredatorPrey 4.

Fig. 9: Smoothed average rewards for PredatorPrey 4. The
bold area represents the 95% confidence intervals.

2, with agent 3 and 4 the convergence has not stabilized. This
suggests that, in this case, the agents are still exploring.
These representations show how the RQN self-deprecates,
because when the training objective is reached, the values
estimated by this network should remain stable. The reason
is that at the moment of convergence and the objective was
achieved, the individual trajectories no longer need to be
adjusted.
2) Impact of a Lower Level of Monotonicity: To evaluate
the performance of QTRAN, QMIX and RQN against a change
in the level of the monotonicity in the tasks experimented in
this paper, we show now the results for the same PredatorPrey
task with 4 agents as in VI but now with a capture penalty
of -0.1. This means that, if one of the agents tries to capture
the prey alone, then each agent of the team receives a penalty
of -0.1 (each agent gets this penalty that will be added into a

10

TABLE III: Hyperparameters used in subsubsection VI-D2 for the modified PredatorPrey 4.
HYPERPARAMETER

VALUE

DESCRIPTION

BATCH SIZE
BUFFER SIZE
INITIAL 
MINIMUM 
 ANNEAL STEPS

32
100000
1
0.1
2000000

NUMBER OF SAMPLES AT EACH TRAINING STEP
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SAMPLES TO STORE IN THE BUFFER
STARTING VALUE FOR 
FINAL VALUE FOR 
NUMBER OF STEPS THAT  TAKES TO DECAY

shared team reward). The results are smoothed with a 10-step
cumulative moving average (Figure 9).
In Figure 9 we can see that RQN can still maintain a good
performance over time, while the benchmarked methods suffer
from this change on the environment, mainly QMIX. The
results suggest that QMIX is more sensitive to monotonicity
changes in the environment as it was proved before in [14].
RQN however is capable of still performing well even with
a change in the level of monotonicty of the environment,
suggesting that RQN eliminates this constraint imposed by
QMIX. This observation is also supported by some of the main
experiments in section VI with some non-monotonic tasks. The
hyperparameters used in this additional experimental setting
are summarized in Table III.

state information is unavailable even during training time.
Future work involves the scalability of MARL towards more
complex environments, where the number of agents gradually
increases. Accordingly, we aim to investigate how curriculumbased approaches can be used to extend the current method.
A PPENDIX
W IN RATES FOR THE S TARCRAFT II ENVIRONMENTS

VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
We study the problem of value-function factorization for
MARL within the scope of centralized training and decentralized execution scheme [8], [9]. Here, we propose a method
that uses a novel agent configuration, named as Residual
Q-Networks (RQNs), which transforms the individual factor
functions in a way that preserves the Individual-Global-Max
(IGM) property, and at the same time enables the factorization
in a robust way. The RQN is designed as an auxiliary network
that learns to adjust the action-value function trajectories of
individual agents to reflect the relative importance of different
episodes. With the proposed RQN based approach, it is possible to factorize a wider family of multi-agent environments
by improving the credit assignment problem [7], [16], an issue
that is prominent in decentralized learning. The proposed RQN
architecture not only achieves better performance, but also
improves the performance stability over time.
The experimental results illustrate that the proposed method
can outperform the state-of-the-art methods such as QTRAN,
VDN, QMIX, QPLEX and WQMIX in certain tasks with
strong punishments for non-cooperative behaviours and with
varying levels of complexity and with. An exception to this is
in StarCraft environments, where complete state information
is available, but RQN is yet competitive and learns to solve
the task. The results suggest that the proposed RQN based
approach is capable of factorizing value-functions for more
families of environments than the previous method, owing to
a more robust and relaxed transformation that preserves IGM,
and a neural architecture that is more tractable. Moreover,
opposing to most of the benchmarked methods, RQN does
not take advantage of full state information during the training
phase. This enhances the practical application of RQN, especially towards non-simulated environments where complete

Fig. 10: Win rates for the experimented methods in the
Starcraft II environments. The bold area represents the 95%
confidence intervals.

R EFERENCES
[1] G. Chen, “A New Framework for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
– Centralized Training and Exploration with Decentralized Execution via
Policy Distillation,” in Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2020, p. 1801–1803.
[2] C. Qu, S. Mannor, H. Xu, Y. Qi, L. Song, and J. Xiong, “Value Propagation for Decentralized Networked Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2019,
pp. 1182–1191.
[3] J. Hook, S. El-Sedky, V. De Silva, and A. Kondoz, “Learning data-driven
decision-making policies in multi-agent environments for autonomous
systems,” Cognitive Systems Research, vol. 65, pp. 40–49, 2021.
[4] S. Iqbal and F. Sha, “Actor-Attention-Critic for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Machine Learning, vol. 97. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019, pp. 2961–2970.
[5] T. T. Nguyen, N. D. Nguyen, and S. Nahavandi, “Deep Reinforcement
Learning for Multi-Agent Systems: A Review of Challenges, Solutions
and Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, vol. 50, no. 9,
pp. 3826–3839, Sep. 2020.
[6] Z. Zhang, D. Wang, and J. Gao, “Learning Automata-Based Multiagent
Reinforcement Learning for Optimization of Cooperative Tasks,” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, pp. 1–14, 2020.

11

[7] E. Wei, D. Wicke, D. Freelan, and S. Luke, “Multiagent Soft QLearning,” AAAI Spring Symposium Series, 2018.
[8] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch, “MultiAgent Actor-Critic for Mixed Cooperative-Competitive Environments,”
in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017, p. 6382–6393.
[9] J. Foerster, G. Farquhar, T. Afouras, N. Nardelli, and S. Whiteson,
“Counterfactual Multi-Agent Policy Gradients,” in AAAI 2018: Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
February 2018.
[10] J. K. Gupta, M. Egorov, and M. Kochenderfer, “Cooperative Multi-Agent
Control Using Deep Reinforcement Learning,” in Autonomous Agents
and Multi-Agent Systems, 2017, vol. 10642, pp. 66–83.
[11] J. Hook, V. D. Silva, and A. Kondoz, “Deep Multi-Critic Network
for accelerating Policy Learning in multi-agent environments,” Neural
Networks, vol. 128, pp. 97–106, 2020.
[12] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. Schroeder, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster,
and S. Whiteson, “QMIX: Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for
Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning,” in Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 80, 10–15 Jul 2018,
pp. 4295–4304.
[13] P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. F. Zambaldi,
M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Sonnerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, and
T. Graepel, “Value-Decomposition Networks for Cooperative MultiAgent Learning Based on Team Reward,” in Proceedings of the 17th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, AAMAS 2018, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, 2018, pp.
2085–2087.
[14] K. Son, D. Kim, W. J. Kang, D. E. Hostallero, and Y. Yi, “QTRAN:
Learning to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent
reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 97, 09–15 Jun 2019, pp. 5887–5896.
[15] B. J. Lansdell, P. R. Prakash, and K. P. Kording, “Learning to solve the
credit assignment problem,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2020.
[16] J. Yang, A. Nakhaei, D. Isele, K. Fujimura, and H. Zha, “CM3: Cooperative Multi-goal Multi-stage Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[17] J. Wang, Z. Ren, T. Liu, Y. Yu, and C. Zhang, “QPLEX: Duplex Dueling
Multi-Agent Q-Learning,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2021.
[18] T. Rashid, G. Farquhar, B. Peng, and S. Whiteson, “Weighted QMIX:
Expanding Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep MultiAgent Reinforcement Learning,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 33, 2020, pp. 10 199–10 210.
[19] M. Tan, “Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: Independent vs. Cooperative Agents,” in In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference
on Machine Learning, 1993, pp. 330–337.
[20] C. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Technical Note: Q-Learning,” Machine
Learning, vol. 8, pp. 279–292, 1992.
[21] A. Tampuu, T. Matiisen, D. Kodelja, I. Kuzovkin, K. Korjus, J. Aru,
J. Aru, and R. Vicente, “Multiagent cooperation and competition with
deep reinforcement learning,” PLOS ONE, vol. 12, no. 4, p. e0172395,
2017.
[22] C. Sun, W. Liu, and L. Dong, “Reinforcement learning with task
decomposition for cooperative multiagent systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 2054–
2065, 2021.
[23] J. Foerster, I. A. Assael, N. de Freitas, and S. Whiteson, “Learning
to Communicate with Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 29, 2016.
[24] S. Sukhbaatar, A. Szlam, and R. Fergus, “Learning Multiagent Communication with Backpropagation,” in Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016, p.
2252–2260.
[25] A. Das, T. Gervet, J. Romoff, D. Batra, D. Parikh, M. Rabbat, and
J. Pineau, “TarMAC: Targeted Multi-Agent Communication,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
vol. 97, 09–15 Jun 2019, pp. 1538–1546.
[26] F. A. Oliehoek and C. Amato, A Concise Introduction to Decentralized
POMDPs, 1st ed. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2016.
[27] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski,
S. Petersen, C. Beattie, A. Sadik, I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Kumaran,
D. Wierstra, S. Legg, and D. Hassabis, “Human-level control through
deep reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol. 518, pp. 529–533, 02 2015.

[28] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition,” 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016.
[29] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Identity Mappings in Deep
Residual Networks,” in ECCV (4), 2016, pp. 630–645.
[30] A. Koul, “ma-gym: Collection of Multi-Agent environments based
on OpenAI Gym,” GitHub repository, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/koulanurag/ma-gym
[31] M. Samvelyan, T. Rashid, C. Schroeder de Witt, G. Farquhar,
N. Nardelli, T. G. J. Rudner, C.-M. Hung, P. H. S. Torr, J. Foerster,
and S. Whiteson, “The StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge,” in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
MultiAgent Systems, 2019.
Rafael Pina is currently a Ph.D. student at Loughborough University London
in machine intelligence. His work focus mainly on Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning. He got his B.S. in Informatics Engineering at the University
of Coimbra in 2019 and his M.S. in Cyber Security and Big Data at
Loughborough University London in 2020.
Varuna De Silva received his Ph.D. from University of Surrey in United
Kingdom in 2011. He was a postdoctoral researcher in the same institute
between 2011-2013, working on video and image processing for Multiview
video broadcasting applications. Since 2013 November, he worked as a senior
algorithms developer for image signal processors at Apical Ltd, UK (Now part
of ARM Plc). In April 2016, he joined Loughborough University, as a lecturer
in digital engineering, where he was promoted to a Senior Lecturer in Jan
2020.
Joosep Hook holds a B.S. in Computer Engineering from the University of
Tartu. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. in machine learning at Loughborough
University London. His work focus on Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
and Curriculum Learning.
Ahmet Kondoz received the B.S. (Hons.) degree in engineering from the
University of Greenwich, Greenwich, U.K., in 1983, and the Ph.D. degree in
telecommunication from the University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K., in 1987.
He became a Lecturer in 1988, a Reader in 1995, and then a Professor in
Multimedia Communication Systems in 1996, at the University of Surrey.
Ahmet took part in setting up of the world renowned Centres CCSR and
the I-Lab at the University of Surrey before joining Loughborough University
London where he is now the Director of the Institute for Digital Technologies.
He has published more than 400 journal and conference papers, three books,
and nine patents.

