YOLO-MARL: You Only LLM Once for Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning

arXiv:2410.03997v2 [cs.MA] 18 Jun 2025

Yuan Zhuang1† , Yi Shen2† , Zhili Zhang1 , Yuxiao Chen3 and Fei Miao1∗
Abstract— Advancements in deep multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) have positioned it as a promising approach for
decision-making in cooperative games. However, it still remains
challenging for MARL agents to learn cooperative strategies
for some game environments. Recently, large language models
(LLMs) have demonstrated emergent reasoning capabilities,
making them promising candidates for enhancing coordination
among the agents. However, due to the model size of LLMs,
it can be expensive to frequently infer LLMs for actions that
agents can take. In this work, we propose You Only LLM
Once for MARL (YOLO-MARL), a novel framework that
leverages the high-level task planning capabilities of LLMs to
improve the policy learning process of multi-agents in cooperative games. Notably, for each game environment, YOLOMARL only requires one time interaction with LLMs in the
proposed strategy generation, state interpretation and planning
function generation modules, before the MARL policy training
process. This avoids the ongoing costs and computational time
associated with frequent LLMs API calls during training.
Moreover, trained decentralized policies based on normalsized neural networks operate independently of the LLM.
We evaluate our method across two different environments
and demonstrate that YOLO-MARL outperforms traditional
MARL algorithms. The Github repository of our code can be
found at https://github.com/paulzyzy/YOLO-MARL.

I. INTRODUCTION
MARL has become a vital framework for solving decisionmaking problems in complex multi-agent systems. With the
rising applications of multi-agent systems, it is increasingly
crucial for individual agents to cooperate or compete in
dynamic environments without relying on centralized control
[1]. In cooperative Markov games, agents work together
to maximize joint rewards. However, existing MARL approaches often struggle with learning effective distributed
policies, particularly in tasks characterized by sparse rewards,
dynamic environments, and large action spaces.
Concurrently, LLMs have demonstrated remarkable capabilities as high-level semantic planners by leveraging incontext learning and extensive prior knowledge [2]. Recent
studies have showcased LLMs deployed as embodied agents
[3], [4], as well as their use in guiding reinforcement learning
(RL) as ELLM, which leverages LLMs to suggest goals [5],
and work focusing on aligning LLM-provided actions with
RL policies [6]. Despite these promising developments, integrating LLMs into multi-agent settings remains largely unexplored. Moreover, repeated interactions with LLMs during
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
1 University of Connecticut
2 University of Pennsylvania
3 NVIDIA
∗ Corresponding author: Fei Miao (fei.miao@uconn.edu)

long-episode or complex tasks can be both time-consuming
and computationally prohibitive, particularly when training
over tens of millions of steps.
Addressing these challenges, we propose YOLO-MARL,
a novel framework combining LLM’s high-level planning
capabilities with MARL policy training, as shown in Fig. 1.
YOLO-MARL uniquely requires just one LLM interaction
per environment. Once the strategy generation, state interpretation, and planning function generation modules produce
the necessary guidance, the MARL training process proceeds
without further LLM involvement. This design substantially
reduces the communication overhead and computational cost
typically associated with LLM inferences. Moreover, YOLOMARL demonstrates its strong generalization capability and
simplicity for application, since it only requires a basic understanding of the new environments from users. We validate
our framework on a sparse reward multi-agent environment:
Level-Based Foraging (LBF) environment [1] as well as
the Multi-Agent Particle (MPE) environment [7], and our
results show that YOLO-MARL outperforms several MARL
baselines, such as [7]–[9]. To the best of our knowledge,
this work represents one of the first trials to fuse the highlevel reasoning and planning abilities of LLMs with MARL,
pointing a new direction for scalable and efficient multi-agent
coordination [10].
In summary, our proposed method YOLO-MARL has the
following advantages:
• This framework synergizes the planning capabilities of
LLMs with MARL to enhance the policy learning in
challenging cooperative game environments. In particular, our approach exploits the LLM’s wide-ranging reasoning ability to generate high-level planning functions
to facilitate agents in coordination.
• YOLO-MARL requires minimal LLMs involvement,
which significantly reduces computational overhead and
mitigates communication connection instability concerns when invoking LLMs during the training process.
• Our approach leverages zero-shot prompting and can be
easily adapted to various game environments, with only
basic prior knowledge required from users.
An overview of YOLO-MARL is presented in Fig. 1, and
all related prompts, environments, and generated planning
functions are available in our GitHub repository.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
MARL has attracted significant attention for its potential to address complex, decentralized problems. A popular

MARL Training

State Interpretation

Strategy Generation

State Interpretation Function

Environment

Raw
State:𝑆"

Environment and Task Description

State
Interpretation
Function:𝐹# ()

“This environment has N agents…”
“Your goal is…”
“You have to follow the rules of the game…”

Raw
State:𝑆"

Processed

𝑅 = 𝑟 + ' ∆𝑟

LLM (Claude 3.5)

State:𝑆%
Agents

Reward

LLM (Claude 3.5)

!

LLM generated strategies:

LLM Generated Planning Function

“Goal and purpose…”
“Approach / Methodology…”
“Observation and task break down…”

LLM Generated
Planning
Function:𝐹$ ()

Actions:𝑎!

Assign
Task:𝑇!

Reward Function

Planning Function Generation

Fig. 1: Depiction of our framework YOLO-MARL. (a). Strategy Generation: We pass basic environment and task description
into the LLM to get generated strategies for this specific environment. (b). State Interpretation: We process the global states
so that the format of global states will be more structured and organized for better comprehension by the LLM. (c).
Planning Function Generation: We chain together the environment and task description, LLM generated strategies and state
interpretation function. These prompts are then fed into the LLM to generate a Python planning function for this environment.
(d). MARL Training: The state interpretation function and the generated planning function are integrated into the MARL
training process. The LLM is no longer required for further interaction after the Planning Function Generation. The more
detailed explanation of MARL Training part can be found in Algorithm 1

paradigm is centralized training with decentralized execution. Methods like QMIX [9] and MADDPG [7] employ
centralized critics during training to coordinate agents, while
allowing independent execution at test time. In cooperative
environments, COMA [11] and VDN [12] enable agents to
share rewards and maximize joint returns. Despite these advances, many existing MARL algorithms struggle in sparsereward settings and have difficulty learning fully cooperative
policies. Moreover, only limited work has explored the integration of LLMs with MARL [10], leaving open questions
about leveraging LLMs for multi-agent decision-making.
B. Large Language Models for RL and Decision-Making
Recent studies have incorporated LLMs into the RL
training process to enhance performance. For instance,
[5] improve agent exploration by aligning LLM-suggested
goals with observed behaviors, while [13] generate actions
conditioned on language-based prompts during online RL.
Similarly, [6] uses LLMs to provide scalar rewards that
guide training. However, many of these approaches focus on
single-agent settings or require extensive interactions with
LLMs during training. And [14] highlights the limitations
of LLMs in handling complex low-level tasks. Other works,
such as [15], studies a multi-task RL problem. SayCan [2]
grounds LLMs via value functions of pretrained skills to
execute abstract commands on robots. [16] finds that codewriting LLMs can be re-purposed to write robot policy
code. Additionally, studies like [17] and [18] exploit LLMs’
prior knowledge and code-generation capabilities to produce

reward functions. In contrast, our approach leverages LLMs
to generate planning functions, thereby enhancing MARL
without continuous LLM involvement.
C. Large Language Models for Multi-Agent Systems
LLM-based multi-agent systems have been employed
in diverse applications requiring varied agent roles and
collaborative decision-making [10], [19]. Camel [20] and
MetaGPT [21] deploy multiple LLM agents for tasks like
brainstorming and software development. SMART-LLM [22]
decomposes multi-robot task planning into subgoals, and CoNavGPT [23] uses LLMs as global planners for cooperative
navigation. Other research has focused on applying LLMs
in strategic gaming environments [24]–[28]. Unlike these
approaches, which use LLMs directly as agents or decisionmakers, our method harnesses the planning capabilities of
LLMs to train compact, efficient MARL policies.
III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Markov game is defined as a multi-agent decision-making
problem when the interaction between multiple agents affect
the state dynamics of the entire system and the reward of
each agent under certain conditions [29]. In this work, we
consider a Markov game, or a stochastic game [30] defined
as a tuple G := (N , S, A, {ri }i∈N , p, γ), where N is a set
of N agents, S = S1 × · · · × SN is the joint state space, A =
A1 ×· · ·×AN is the joint action space, with (Si , Ai ) as the state
space and action space of agent i, respectively, γ ∈ [0, 1) is the
discounting factor [29], [30]. The state transition p : S × A →

∆(S) is controlled by the current state and joint action, where
∆(S) represents the set of all probability distributions over
the joint state space S. Each agent has a reward function, ri :
S × A → R. At time t, agent i chooses its action ati according
to a policy π i : S → ∆(Ai ).
For each agent i, it attempts to maximize its expected sum
of discounted rewards, i.e. its objective function J i (s, π) =
∞
γ t−1 rti (st , at )|s1 = s, at ∼ π(·|st ) . In the literature,
E ∑t=1
MARL algorithms [7]–[9] have been designed to train neural
network-based policies πi (θi ). For a cooperative game, one
shared reward function for all agents is widely used during
the training process, which is also considered in this work.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we introduce YOLO-MARL, a framework
that leverages the high-level planning capabilities of LLMs
to enhance MARL. YOLO-MARL integrates four key components: Strategy Generation, State Interpretation, Planning
Function Generation, and MARL training process with the
LLM generated Planning Function incorporated throughout.
Algorithm 1 YOLO-MARL Training Process
Require: Large Language Model LLM, State Interpretation function FS , MARL actor A , MARL algorithm MARLalg , Initial
Prompts Pinit
1: Hyperparameters: reward signal r′ , penalty signal p′
2: PStrategy ∼ LLM(Pinit ) // Strategy Generation
3: P = Pinit + PStrategy + FS // Chaining all the prompt for Planning
Function Generation
4: FT ∼ LLM(P) // Planning Function Generation: Sample functions code from the LLM
5: MARL training with generated planning function
6: for each training step do
7:
SI ← FS (Sv ) // State Interpretation: Get processed global
observation SI from FS
8:
T1 , T2 , . . . ← FT (SI ) // Assign tasks T to each agent
9:
a1 , a2 , . . . ← A (Sv ) // Output actions from the actor
10:
for each agent i do
11:
if ai ∈ Ti then
12:
∆ri ← r′
13:
else
14:
∆ri ← p′
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
R ← r + ∑i ∆ri // Compute final reward for critic: More
details are in equation 1, 2
18:
π(θ ) = MARLalg (R) // Use R as the final reward for MARL
training
19: end for
20: return Trained MARL policy

A. Strategy Generation
To ensure applicability across diverse environments—even
for users with limited domain knowledge—we incorporate a
Strategy Generation Module, as shown in the blue box of Figure 1(a). In this module, the LLM receives basic environment
details (e.g., task descriptions, rules, and constraints) along
with a general guideline, and then autonomously outputs a
detailed strategy in a prescribed format without requiring
extensive human input or expertise.
The Strategy Generation is crucial for several reasons:

Reducing User Burden: It alleviates the need for users to
comprehensively understand new environments, saving
time and effort.
• Enhancing Generalization: It enables the framework to
adapt to different environments with minimal prompt
modifications.
• Facilitating Planning Function Generation: The strategies serve as vital components in the prompts used for
the Planning Function Generation Module. The results
of using YOLO-MARL but without Strategy Generation
Module are shown in ablation study VI-A .
•

The LLM-generated strategies are incorporated into the
prompt alongside other necessary information to facilitate
the subsequent planning function generation.
B. State Interpretation
In many simulation environments, observations are provided as vectors, with each component encoded in a nonsemantic format. Although such representations are effective
for training deep RL models, they pose challenges for LLMs
that require context to interpret each component correctly.
We propose the State Interpretation Module to assist the
LLM in interpreting the environment state. By providing a
semantically meaningful representation of the state, the LLM
can successfully generate executable planning functions for
training. Formally, given the current environment state in
vector form Sv , we define an interpretation function FS
such that FS (Sv ) → SI , where SI provides more explicit and
meaningful information about each state component.
Recent works like [17] and [18] have demonstrated the
success of enhancing LLMs performance by providing relevant environment code. In the same manner, we include the
interpretation function FS in the prompting pipeline, formatted as Python environment code as shown in the purple box
in Figure 1(b). The State Interpretation Module significantly
reduces the risk of the LLM generating erroneous functions
with outputs incompatible with the training procedures. An
ablation study on the effectiveness of this module can be
found in Sec VI-B.
C. Planning Function Generation
A crucial component of our method is leveraging the
LLM to perform high-level planning instead of handling lowlevel actions. We combine all the prompts from the previous
modules and input them into the LLM. The LLM then
generates a reasonable and executable planning function that
can be directly utilized in the subsequent training process.
To be more concise, given any processed state SI , we define an assignment planning function as FT (SI ) → Ti ∈ T ,
where T = {T1 , ..., Tn } is a set of target assignments that
each agent can take. We define the assignment set T over
the action space such that an action can belong to multiple
assignments and vice versa. For example, if the assignment
space is defined as T = {Landmark 0, Landmark 1}, and
landmark 0 and landmark 1 are located at the top right
and top left positions relative to the agent respectively, then

taking the action “UP” can be associated with both assignments. Conversely, we can have multiple actions correspond
to an assignment. For instance, moving towards “Landmark
0” may involve actions like “UP” and “RIGHT”.
The Planning Function Generation will only be required
once for each new environment you try to use. After you
interact with the LLM to get generated planning function,
you can directly use it in the later training process with
different MARL algorithms. This is referred to the red
module in Fig. 1(c).
D. MARL training with Planning function incorporation
To incorporate the planning function into MARL training,
we add an extra reward term to the original reward provided
by environments. Specifically, we define the final reward R
used by the critic as:
R = r + ∑ ∆ri .

(1)

i

Here, r is the original reward from the environment.
For each agent i, ∆ri is an additional reward or penalty
that determined based on whether the action taken by the
agent aligns with the task assigned by the planning function.
Specifically:
(
r′ , if ai ∈ Ti
∆ri =
(2)
p′ , if ai ∈
/ Ti
Notably, we don’t need to interact with the LLM during
the entire training process, nor do we need to call the planning function after the policy has been trained. The training
process MARLalg (R) takes R as the reward function, uses the
same state and action space. We follow the standard MARL
algorithms and evaluation metrics within the literature, such
as [8], [9], and [7]. Our method, as shown in the green box
in Fig. 1(d), is highly efficient compared to approaches that
interact with LLMs throughout the whole training process
or directly use LLMs as agents. In practice, using the
LLM’s API to generate the planning function incurs minimal
cost—less than a dollar per environment—even when using
the most advanced LLM APIs.
V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate our method across two different environments: MPE and LBF.
A. Setup
Baselines. In our experiments, we compare the MARL
algorithm MADDPG [7], MAPPO [8] and QMIX [9] and
set default hyper-parameters according to the well-tuned
performance of human-written reward, and fix that in all
experiments on this task to do MARL training. Experiment
hyper parameters are listed in Appendix.
LLM As one of the most advanced LLMs available
at the time of experimentation, Claude 3.5 Sonnet exhibited enhanced reasoning and code generation abilities
critical for our framework’s strategy formulation and planning functions. This performance advantage led us to select

claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620 as our primary LLM
for all reported experiments.1
Metrics. To assess the performance of our method, we
use the mean return in evaluation for all other environments.
During evaluation, we rely solely on the default return values
provided by the environments for both the baseline and our
method, ensuring a fair comparison.
B. Results
Level-Based Foraging. LBF [1] is a challenging sparse
reward environment designed for MARL training. In this
environment, agents must learn to navigate a path and
successfully collect food, with rewards only being given upon
task completion. To evaluate our framework in a cooperative
setting, we selected the 2-player, 2-food fully cooperative
scenario. In this setting, all agents must work together
and coordinate their actions to collect the food simultaneously. The environment offers an action space consisting of
[NONE, NORTH, SOUTH, WEST, EAST, LOAD], and we
define the task set as [NONE, Food i, ..., LOAD]. Using the
relative positions of agents and food items, we map assigned
tasks to the corresponding actions in the action space and
calculate the reward based on this alignment. We evaluated
our framework over 3 different seeds, with the results shown
in Figure 2 and Table I. LLM assist the MARL algorithm
by providing reward signals, our framework significantly outperformed the baseline, achieving a maximum improvement
of 105 % in mean return and a 2x faster convergence rate
among all tested MARL algorithms. According to the results,
our framework is effective across all the baseline algorithms,
with particularly large improvements observed in QMIX
and MADDPG, and a faster convergence rate for MAPPO.
To assess the variability in the quality of our generated
functions, we present the results of three different generated
functions in Figure 6 and Table II in Appendix. The results
demonstrate that our framework consistently generates highquality functions, with each achieving similar improvements
across all baseline algorithms.
Multi-Agent Particle Environment. We evaluate our
framework in MPE [7] simple spread environment which
is a fully cooperative game. This environment has N agents,
N landmarks. At a high level, agents must learn to cover
all the landmarks while avoiding collisions. It’s action space
consists of [no action, move left, move right, move down,
move up]. We define the assignment for each agent to take to
be [Landmark i,...,No action]. During training, based on the
global observation, we obtain the relative position of each
agent with respect to the landmarks. Similar to LBF, we
map each assignment of agent back to the corresponding
action space and then reward the action of policy in action
space level. We evaluate our approach on 3-agent and 4agent scenarios using QMIX and MADDPG as baselines. As
shown in Figure 3, our framework(colored line) outperforms
the baseline(black line) algorithm in mean returns by 7.66%
and 8.8% for 3-agent scenario, and 2.4% and 18.09% for
1 https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-3-5-sonnet

TABLE I: Comparison between YOLO-MARL and MARL in the LBF environment across three seeds. The highest evaluation
return means during training are highlighted in bold. The corresponding results can be found in Figure 2. The M means one
million training steps. We run all the experiments on the same machine.
Mean Return after 0.2M / 0.4M / 1.5M / 2M Steps

MARL
YOLO-MARL

(a) MADDPG

QMIX

MADDPG

MAPPO

0.00/ 0.01/ 0.25/ 0.38
0.01/ 0.02 / 0.60/ 0.78

0.09/ 0.33/ 0.26/ 0.32
0.13/ 0.38/ 0.39/ 0.44

0.31/ 0.72/ 0.99/ 0.99
0.93/ 0.98/ 0.99/ 0.99

(b) MAPPO

(c) QMIX

Fig. 2: Results for LBF environment across 3 seeds: The solid lines indicate the mean performance, and the shaded areas
represent the range (minimum to maximum) across 3 different seeds.

4-agent scenario with QMIX and MADDPG respectively.
These improvements demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework in enhancing coordination among agents to cover
up all the landmarks.
VI. A BLATION S TUDY
In this section, we conduct the ablation studies mainly in
LBF 2 players 2 food fully cooperative environment since
rewards in LBF are sparser compared to MPE [1]. We refer
to V-B for more information about the environment.
A. Comparison between YOLO-MARL with and without
Strategy Generation
In this section, we examine the impact of the Strategy
Generation Module on the performance of the YOLO-MARL
framework. Specifically, we compare the standard YOLOMARL with a variant that excludes the Strategy Generation
Module to assess its significance.
According to our tests, the Strategy Generation Module
plays an important role in the YOLO-MARL method. As
shown in Figure 4 , without the LLM generated strategy, we
obtain a worse-performing planning function. Interestingly,
the mean returns of evaluations for the functions without
the LLM generated strategy are not always close to zero,
indicating that the generated planning functions are not
entirely incorrect. Based on this, we could confirm that the
Strategy Generation Module would help Planning Function
Generation Module provides better solutions to this game.
Moreover, giving the strategy also helps stabilize the quality
of the generated code. We observe a higher risk of obtaining
erroneous functions without supplying the strategy.
B. Comparison between YOLO-MARL with and without
State Interpretation
To demonstrate how the State Interpretation Module enhances our framework, we present two failure case snippets:

Without the Interpretation Function: The interpretation
function is omitted entirely from the prompting pipeline.
• Providing Raw Environment Code Directly: Raw environment source code is fed directly to the LLM.
The LLM is unable to infer the type of state and attempts
to fetch environment information via a non-existent key if
no preprocessing code provided. And if environment code is
provided without dimensional context for each component,
the LLM is likely to make random guesses. In both scenarios,
the absence of explicit state interpretation hinders the LLM’s
ability to generate accurate and executable planning functions. These failures underscore the importance of the State
Interpretation Module in bridging the gap between vectorized
observations and the LLM’s requirement for semantically
meaningful input.
By incorporating the State Interpretation Module, we
enable the LLM to understand the environment’s state representation effectively. This results in the generation of
reliable planning functions that significantly enhance the
performance of our YOLO-MARL framework.
•

C. Comparison between YOLO-MARL and reward generation
In this section, we compare our YOLO-MARL method
with approaches that utilize the LLM for reward generation
without reward function template. We explore two scenarios:
reward generation without feedback and reward generation
with feedback. For the reward generation without feedback,
the reward function is generated at the same stage as the
planning function for fair comparison. This means that we
generate the reward function before all the training process
for each new environment. For the reward generation with
feedback, we first generate a reward function just like the
reward generation without feedback. And then, iteratively,
we will run a whole training process on this environment

(a) 3 Agents – MADDPG

(b) 3 Agents – QMIX

(c) 4 Agents – MADDPG

(d) 4 Agents – QMIX

Fig. 3: Results for MPE simple spread environment with 3 agents (top row a and b) and 4 agents (bottom row c and d).
The solid lines indicate the mean performance, and the shaded areas represent the range (minimum to maximum) across 3
different generated planning functions.

(a) MADDPG

(b) MAPPO

(c) QMIX

Fig. 4: Comparison between YOLO-MARL with and without using LLM generated strategies in LBF

and pass the feedback of this training performance to the
LLM, combined with previous prompts and ask the LLM to
refine the previous generated reward function.
Our experiments show that relying solely on the LLMgenerated reward function leads to poor performance. As
shown in Figure 5, the mean return for the LLM-generated
reward function pair consistently falls below the performance
of all three MARL algorithms. This indicates that agents
are not learning effectively under the LLM-generated reward function. However, we do observe a slight positive
return. This suggest the potential of using this framework
for reward shaping tasks, particularly in situations where
standard MARL algorithms struggle to learn in sparse reward
scenarios. To investigate whether iterative refinement could
improve the LLM generated reward function, we supply the
LLM with the generated reward function from the prior
iteration and feedback on its performance. Despite this
iterative process, the LLM still fails to output a suitable
reward function for the LBF environment. The mean return
of evaluations remains close to zero, as shown in figure 7.

VII. C ONCLUSION
We propose YOLO-MARL, a novel framework that enhances MARL policy training by integrating LLMs’ highlevel planning capabilities with a single interaction per
environment. This design reduces computational overhead
and mitigates instability issues associated with frequent
LLM interactions during training. This approach not only
outperforms traditional MARL algorithms but also operates
independently of the LLM during execution, demonstrating
strong generalization capabilities across various environments.
We evaluate YOLO-MARL across two different environments: the MPE environment and the LBF environment. Our experiments showed that YOLO-MARL outperforms or achieve competitive results compared to baseline
MARL methods. The integration of LLM-generated highlevel assignment planning functions facilitated improved
policy learning in challenging cooperative tasks. Finally, we
mention a possible way to incorporate reward generation to
our framework and we will step further.

(a) MADDPG

(b) MAPPO

(c) QMIX

Fig. 5: Comparison between YOLO-MARL and reward generation without feedback in LBF

R EFERENCES
[1] G. Papoudakis and L. Schäfer, “Benchmarking Multi-Agent Deep
Reinforcement Learning Algorithms in Cooperative Tasks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.07869, 2021.
[2] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, B. David,
C. Finn, C. Fu, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman et al., “Do as i
can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
[3] H. Zhang, W. Du, J. Shan, Q. Zhou, Y. Du, J. B. Tenenbaum, T. Shu,
and C. Gan, “Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02485, 2023.
[4] S. S. Kannan, V. L. N. Venkatesh, and B.-C. Min, “Smart-llm: Smart
multi-agent robot task planning using large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.10062, 2024.
[5] Y. Du, O. Watkins, Z. Wang, C. Colas, T. Darrell, P. Abbeel, A. Gupta,
and J. Andreas, “Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06692, 2023.
[6] M. Kwon, S. M. Xie, K. Bullard, and D. Sadigh, “Reward Design
with Language Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00001, 2023.
[7] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-Agent Actor-Critic for Mixed Cooperative-Competitive Environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02275, 2020.
[8] C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, J. Gao, Y. Wang, A. Bayen, and Y. Wu,
“The Surprising Effectiveness of PPO in Cooperative, Multi-Agent
Games,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01955, 2022.
[9] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster,
and S. Whiteson, “QMIX: Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.11485, 2018.
[10] C. Sun, S. Huang, and D. Pompili, “Llm-based multi-agent reinforcement learning: Current and future directions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.11106, 2024.
[11] J. N. Foerster, G. Farquhar, T. Afouras, N. Nardelli, and S. Whiteson, “Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.08926, 2017.
[12] P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. F. Zambaldi,
M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Sonnerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, and
T. Graepel, “Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multiagent learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 2017.
[13] T. Carta, C. Romac, T. Wolf, S. Lamprier, O. Sigaud, and P.Y. Oudeyer, “Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.02662, 2023.
[14] F. Lin, E. L. Malfa, V. Hofmann, E. M. Yang, A. Cohn, and J. B. Pierrehumbert, “Graph-enhanced large language models in asynchronous
plan reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02805, 2024.
[15] L. Fan, G. Wang, Y. Jiang, A. Mandlekar, Y. Yang, H. Zhu, A. Tang,
D.-A. Huang, Y. Zhu, and A. Anandkumar, “Minedojo: Building openended embodied agents with internet-scale knowledge,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 18 343–18 362,
2022.
[16] J. Liang, W. Huang, F. Xia, P. Xu, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, P. Florence,
and A. Zeng, “Code as policies: Language model programs for
embodied control,” Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2023.
[17] Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, G. Wang, D.-A. Huang, O. Bastani, D. Jayaraman,
Y. Zhu, and A. Anandkumar, “EUREKA: HUMAN-LEVEL REWARD DESIGN VIA CODING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12931, 2024.

[18] T. Xie, S. Zhao, C. H. Wu, Y. Liu, Q. Luo, V. Zhong, Y. Yang, and
T. Yu, “Text2Reward: Automated Dense Reward Function Generation
for Reinforcement Learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11489, 2023.
[19] T. Guo, X. Chen, Y. Wang, R. Chang, S. Pei, N. V. Chawla, O. Wiest,
and X. Zhang, “Large language model based multi-agents: A survey
of progress and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680, 2024.
[20] G. Li, H. Hammoud, H. Itani, D. Khizbullin, and B. Ghanem, “Camel:
Communicative agents for” mind” exploration of large language model
society,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36,
2024.
[21] S. Hong, X. Zheng, J. Chen, Y. Cheng, J. Wang, C. Zhang,
Z. Wang, S. K. S. Yau, Z. Lin, L. Zhou et al., “Metagpt: Meta
programming for multi-agent collaborative framework,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.
[22] S. S. Kannan, V. L. Venkatesh, and B.-C. Min, “Smart-llm: Smart
multi-agent robot task planning using large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.10062, 2023.
[23] B. Yu, H. Kasaei, and M. Cao, “Co-navgpt: Multi-robot cooperative visual semantic navigation using large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.07937, 2023.
[24] S. Hu, T. Huang, F. Ilhan, S. Tekin, G. Liu, R. Kompella, and L. Liu,
“A survey on large language model-based game agents,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.02039, 2024.
[25] R. Gong, Q. Huang, X. Ma, H. Vo, Z. Durante, Y. Noda, Z. Zheng, S.C. Zhu, D. Terzopoulos, L. Fei-Fei, and J. Gao, “Mindagent: Emergent
gaming interaction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09971, 2023.
[26] S. Wu, L. Zhu, T. Yang, S. Xu, Q. Fu, Y. Wei, and H. Fu, “Enhance
reasoning for large language models in the game werewolf,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.02330, 2024.
[27] H. Li, Y. Q. Chong, S. Stepputtis, J. Campbell, D. Hughes, M. Lewis,
and K. Sycara, “Theory of mind for multi-agent collaboration via large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10701, 2023.
[28] W. Ma, Q. Mi, X. Yan, Y. Wu, R. Lin, H. Zhang, and J. Wang,
“Large language models play starcraft ii: Benchmarks and a chain
of summarization approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11865, 2023.
[29] M.
L.
Littman,
“Markov
games
as
a
framework
for
multi-agent
reinforcement
learning,”
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781558603356500271,
1994.
[30] G. Owen, “Game theory,” https://books.google.com/books?id=pusfAQAAIAAJ,
1982.

VIII. A PPENDIX
Given the page constraints, we present some additional
experiments in this section.

TABLE II: Comparison between YOLO-MARL and MARL in the LBF environment across three different generated planning
functions. The highest evaluation return means during training are highlighted in bold. The corresponding results can be
found in figure 6. The M means one million training steps. We use two different machines to generate planning functions
and run MARL and YOLO-MARL on the same machines where the planning functions are generated.
Mean Return after 0.2M / 0.4M / 1.5M / 2M Steps

MARL
YOLO-MARL

(a) MADDPG

QMIX

MADDPG

MAPPO

0.00/ 0.01/ 0.25/ 0.36
0.00/ 0.03/ 0.69/ 0.95

0.08/ 0.28/ 0.24/ 0.29
0.18/ 0.40/ 0.42/ 0.47

0.38/ 0.74/ 0.99/ 0.99
0.94/ 0.97/ 0.99/ 0.99

(b) MAPPO

(c) QMIX

Fig. 6: Results for LBF environment across 3 seeds: The solid lines indicate the mean performance, and the shaded areas
represent the range (minimum to maximum) across 3 different seeds.

(a) Iteration one

(b) Iteration two

(c) Iteration three

(d) Iteration four

Fig. 7: Results of only reward generation with feedback in the LBF environment. The total number of iteration is 4 and the
MARL algorithm we used here is MAPPO.

