Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv
December 6, 2024

©ESO 2024

A ΛCDM Extension Explaining the Hubble Tension and the Spatial
Curvature Ω k,0 = −0.012 ± 0.010 Measured by the Final PR4 of the
Planck Mission
Horst Foidl1, 2 * and Tanja Rindler-Daller1, 2, 3†

arXiv:2412.04126v1 [astro-ph.CO] 5 Dec 2024

1

Institut für Astrophysik, Universitätssternwarte Wien, Fakultät für Geowissenschaften, Geographie und Astronomie,
Universität Wien, Türkenschanzstr.17, A-1180 Vienna, Austria
2
Vienna International School of Earth and Space Sciences, Universität Wien, Josef-Holaubek-Platz 2, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
3
Wolfgang Pauli Institut, Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
December 6, 2024
ABSTRACT

The measurements of the CMB have determined the cosmological parameters with high accuracy, and the observation of the flatness
of space have contributed to the status of the concordance ΛCDM model. However, the cosmological constant Λ, necessary to close
the model to critical density, remains an open conundrum. We explore the observed late-time accelerated expansion of the Universe,
where we consider that the Friedmann equation describes the expansion history of FLRW universes in the local reference frame of
freely falling comoving observers, which perceive flat, homogeneous and isotropic space in their local inertial system, where, as a
consequence of the equivalence principle, special relativity applies. We use this fact to propose an extension to ΛCDM, incorporating
the initial conditions of the background universe, comprising the initial energy densities as well as the initial post big bang expansion
rate. The observed late-time accelerated expansion is then attributed to a kinematic effect akin to a dark energy component. Choosing
the same Ωm,0 ≃ 0.3 as ΛCDM, its equation of state wde ≃ −0.8. Furthermore, we include the impact on the expansion history
caused by the cosmic web of the late Universe, once voids dominate its volume, and find that the initially constant wde becomes
time-dependent, evolving to a value of wde ≃ −0.9 at the present. While this impact by voids is minor, it is sufficient to provide a
solution to the Hubble tension problem. We use CLASS to calculate the expansion history and power spectra of our extension and
compare our results to concordance ΛCDM and to observations. We find that our model agrees well with current data, in particular
with the final data release PR4 of the Planck mission, where it explains the reported spatial curvature of Ωk,0 = −0.012 ± 0.010.

1. Introduction
The nature of the cosmological constant Λ has been a challenging open problem in modern cosmology. The issue has intensified over the years, as the current concordance model of
ΛCDM – with cold dark matter (CDM) the other open conundrum –, continues to pass many observational tests, especially
on the large scales of the cosmic web, or the cosmic microwave
background (CMB) radiation. In particular, the CMB measurements have invigorated the flat universe interpretation, i.e. that
the space of the background universe has no curvature.
However, it was reasoned that the amount of baryonic matter predicted by big bang nucleosynthesis was far too small to
explain a flat universe (e.g., Steigman (2007)), and even the addition of a substantial amount of dark matter (DM) in the form
of CDM, whose presence was not in doubt any longer by the
late 1980s, was not sufficient to get a universe at critical density,
in order to get a flat geometry of space. In fact, age determinations of the oldest known stars ruled out the Einstein-de Sitter (EdS) model as a viable model, which could have otherwise
been a model for a CDM-dominated universe at the present, with
its critical density provided by matter only (see e.g. Weinberg
(2008)). Finally, in accordance with the predictions from inflation (Guth (1981)), the observations of the CMB by the balloonbased BOOMERanG experiment (de Bernardis et al. (2000)
*
†

horst.foidl@outlook.com
tanja.rindler-daller@univie.ac.at

and MacTavish et al. (2006))), as well as observations with increasing accuracy by the space missions COBE (Smoot et al.
(1992)), WMAP (Hinshaw et al. (2013)) and Planck (PlanckCollaboration (2020)), boosted the flat universe interpretation.
This, and the previous discovery of the accelerated expansion
of the Universe (Perlmutter et al. (1999); Schmidt et al. (1998);
Riess et al. (1998); Perlmutter (2003)), led to the empirical addition of the cosmological constant Λ, in order to get a universe
at critical density, that is a flat universe and the ΛCDM concordance model became the standard model of cosmology.
Despite the great success of ΛCDM, the still unknown nature of CDM and the nature of the cosmological constant Λ,
which, according to measurements, each contribute roughly 25%
and 70%, respectively, to the present-day energy density of the
Universe, remain pending questions. Many cosmological observation campaigns analyze their data, not only in light of testing ΛCDM, but also to examine possible extensions to ΛCDM,
which replace the cosmological constant Λ with different alternative models of dark energy (DE), which employ a timedependent equation of state (EoS) parameter w = p/ρ (The
energy density ρ and the pressure p are commonly understood
as components of some physically or operationally defined DE
component).
Prominent examples of campaigns include the Dark Energy
Survey, see for example, the Year 3 (DES-Y3) results in Abbott et al. (2022, 2023), or the CMB measurements by PlanckCollaboration (2020). They use the so-called “CPL parametrizaArticle number, page 1 of 18

A&A proofs: manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv

tion” by Chevallier & Polarski (2001); Linder (2003) for the EoS
parameter,
w(a) = w0 + (1 − a) wa ,

(1)
1

which is defined for a ∈ [0, 1], where a is the scale factor . The
CPL parametrization is simple and empirically defined, with no
physical motivation for the evolution of w(a) being linear in a. In
Foidl & Rindler-Daller (2024) we exemplify, based on empirical
arguments, that a cosmological model including a CPL-based
DE component with an EoS parameter wde evolving from −0.8
to −0.9 describes the CMB temperature spectrum of ΛCDM
and yields a Hubble constant H0 being compatible with direct
measurements (e.g., Riess et al. (2022)) in the local Universe.
In contrast, however, in this paper we propose physically motivated extensions to ΛCDM – wCDM and owCDM – with a
time-dependent EoS parameter wde of its effective DE component also evolving from −0.8 to −0.9, which we would like to
put up for discussion2 .
In the first part of this paper, we reassess ΛCDM’s flat universe interpretation, where we consider that the Friedmann equation describes the expansion history of Friedmann-LemaîtreRobertson-Walker (FLRW) universes in the local reference
frame of comoving observers, which perceive flat, homogeneous
and isotropic space in their local inertial system, based on the
equivalence principle (see e.g., Weinberg (1972, 2008), Peacock
(1999) or Fließbach (2016)). Thus, the measurements of the
CMB, reporting the flatness of space, confirm that we fulfill the
criterion of a comoving observer to a high degree. We interpret
the expansion history of the background universe as an initial
value problem (IVP), where the post big bang initial conditions
(ICs) in the early Universe are given by the initial densities of
the cosmic components in the Universe (radiation, baryons and
DM) and the post big bang expansion rate Hini .
In the second part of this paper, we find that the kinematic effects induced by the initial expansion rate (post big bang) and
the initial density of the background universe, can be described
in a straightforward manner by associating the operationally defined quantity ρde , dark energy, replacing ρΛ , with an EoS, being
different from that of a cosmological constant. Choosing for the
other parameters the same values as for the ΛCDM concordance
model, our wCDM model yields wde ∼ −0.8, which results in an
expansion history very close to ΛCDM with its wΛ = −1.
In the third part of the paper, we include in our ΛCDM extension the effects of the cosmic voids, which dominate the volume
of the Universe in the late stages of the evolution of the cosmic
web. The resulting backreaction from voids also affects the evolution of the expansion rate. We consistently include this effect
into ρde , using void models informed by cosmological ΛCDM
simulations of the previous literature, and parameterize it by deriving the necessary modifications to the heretofore constant EoS
parameter wde , that becomes a function of time, or scale factor,
respectively, once the voids dominate the volume of the Universe. In fact, the initial value of wde (a) ∼ −0.8 decreases to
1

In practice, cosmological codes, including the one we use
(CLASS), in the default configuration compute observables not earlier
than at a = 10−14 .
2
We use these acronyms for our models, as they are used frequently in the literature to express an extension to ΛCDM, particularly
for dynamical models of DE, without and with spatial curvature, respectively (see e.g. Dark Energy Survey Year 3 Results Abbott et al.
(2023), Planck-Collaboration (2020) and the Particle Data Group Review, Chapter 28 “Dark Energy” Particle Data Group et al. (2022)).
Article number, page 2 of 18

wde (1) ∼ −0.9 at the present where the scale factor a = 1. Thus,
it gets closer to the EoS of a cosmological constant. As a result,
the present-day value of the expansion rate H0 , i.e. the Hubble
constant, shifts to a higher value, compared to the value it would
have, if the EoS parameter remained constant throughout cosmic
time (see also Foidl & Rindler-Daller (2024)). Although the expansion rate is changed by only about 8% due to the impact of
voids, it is enough to provide a solution to the Hubble tension
problem.
By comparing our results with cosmological observations, we
find that our ΛCDM extension is in agreement with current
data. To this end, we apply our proposed procedure by Foidl
& Rindler-Daller (2024) to our model and fit it to the ΛCDM
CMB spectrum and H0 = 73.04 km/s/Mpc as determined by
Riess et al. (2022) in the local Universe, where we, in addition to
wCDM, consider also spatial curvature. The resulting owCDM
model perfectly agrees with the final results of the Planck mission (Tristram et al. (2024)), in particular with the reported spatial curvature of Ωk,0 = −0.012 ± 0.010.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we recapitulate
the basic equations for the evolution of the background universe
in FLRW models. Sec 3 investigates the flat universe interpretation for the general case of FLRW universes, followed by a
discussion of the ICs of the background universe. Sec. 4 proposes a ΛCDM extension, such that the cosmological model incorporates the post big bang initial conditions of the early Universe. Sec. 5 contains our treatment and derivation of the impact of cosmic voids onto the expansion history. This impact is
minor, but significant enough that it provides a possible resolution to the Hubble tension problem. In the following Sec. 6, we
present the results of the numerical simulations of our ΛCDM
extension wCDM, based on our amended version of the code
Cosmic Linear Anisotropy Solving System (CLASS), where we
also compare our results with the concordance ΛCDM model,
as well as with observations. In Sec. 7 we present the results of
our owCDM model and compare it to Planck’s PR4 (Tristram
et al. (2024)). Finally, in Sec. 8, we summarize the presented
concepts, results and implications, also in light of cosmological
observations.

2. Basic Equations for the Expansion History in
FLRW Models
First, we recapitulate the equations involved in the description
of the evolution of the homogeneous and isotropic background
universe, we need in the following. As gravity is the only force
acting on cosmological length scales, it determines the evolution
of the background universe and is described by Einsteins’ field
equations
1
8πG
Rµν − gµν R = 4 T µν ,
2
c

(2)

with the Ricci tensor Rµν and the Ricci scalar R. The left-hand
side (lhs) of the equation is often expressed as Eµν , the Einstein
tensor. The right-hand side (rhs) contains the energy-momentum
tensor T µν , which includes the cosmic inventory of given cosmological models. The energy-momentum tensor T µν determines
the curvature of space, expressed by the metric gµν , which is also
included in the Ricci tensor Rµν and the Ricci scalar R. Cosmological models differ in their assumptions on the nature and
amount of the cosmic components encoded in T µν . As such, all
models are subject to observational constraints.

Horst Foidl and Tanja Rindler-Daller: A ΛCDM Extension Explaining the Hubble Tension and the Spatial Curvature

The geometry of a universe with constant curvature is described by applying the Riemannian formalism of curved surfaces and was developed by Robertson (1936b) and Walker
(1937) based on Milne’s idea of a kinematically determined universe (Milne (1933)) and preceding works by Friedmann Friedmann (1922, 1924) and Lemaître (1927). In spherical coordinates (r, θ, ϕ), the line element of the metric reads as
!
dr2
2
2 2
2
2
2
ds = c dt − R (t)
+ r dΩ
(3a)
1 − kr2
dΩ2 = dθ2 + sin2 θdϕ2 ,

(3b)

with k the curvature index and its values +1 (closed universe),
0 (flat universe), −1 (open universe). The spatial coordinates
(r, θ, ϕ) are defined in the comoving frame where r, θ and ϕ remain “fixed”, corresponding to the assumption of spaces of constant global curvature (the geometry of the Universe). R(t) is the
“radius of curvature”, as called by Kolb & Turner (1990), at cosmic time t (for k = ±1), with the dimension of length.
Applying the FLRW metric (3) to the metric tensor gµν in the
Einstein equations (2), the energy-momentum tensor T µν then
takes a perfect-fluid form, which reads

p
T µν = ρ + 2 uµ uν − gµν p.
(4)
c
p
with uµ and uν the four velocities γ(c, u) and γ = 1/ 1 − u2 /c2 .
The time-time component of the solution to the Einstein equations (2) yields the (first) Friedmann equation in the classical
version, as derived by Friedmann (1922), see for example Kolb
& Turner (1990),
H 2 (t) =

2

kc
8πG
ρ− 2 ,
2
3c
a (t)

(5)

which describes the dynamics of the evolution of the background
universe. Here, ρ refers to the entire energy density of the Universe; k is the curvature index, defined in Eq. (3) determining the
geometry, as k = +1 for a closed (supercritical, density greater
than the critical density) universe, k = −1 for an open (subcritical, density less than the critical density) universe and k = 0
for a flat geometry with critical density. In the forthcoming we
use the notion “geometry” for the curvature of the Universe as
determined by the FLRW metric (3) and the Friedmann equation (5), respectively. a refers to the scale factor, with the dimension of length, which, owing to the symmetries imposed by the
isotropy and homogeneity of the background universe, is a function of cosmic time t and is defined as the relative “size” of an
expanding or contracting universe, relative to its present-day size
|a0 | = 1. H is the Hubble parameter (we use the term expansion
rate interchangeably) defined as
H(t) =

ȧ
,
a

(6)

where the dot refers to the derivative with respect to cosmic
time t. The space-space component yields the second Friedmann
equation
ä
4πG
= − 2 (ρ + 3p) ,
a
3c

Now, let us introduce the cosmic inventory which features the
current concordance ΛCDM model. Also, we introduce some
standard notions and equations which we need in the paper. The
energy densities of interest include cold dark matter (“CDM”),
baryons (“b”) and radiation (“r”) (including photons and neutrinos). In the formulae, we also include the cosmological constant
Λ, empirically added to the cosmic inventory to explain the flatness of space.
In order to study a variety of cosmological models, it has become customary to put “curvature” as well as the cosmological
constant “Λ” into the energy-momentum tensor T µν , by operationally defining “effective” energy densities for them, namely
ρk = −3kc2 /(8πGa2 ) for curvature (“k”), and ρΛ = Λc2 /(8πG)
for the cosmological constant. In the ΛCDM model, ρk = 0 is
prescribed, while ρΛ , 0, such that Λ closes the Universe to
critical density (see Eq. (15)).
We stress that, although ρk represents a geometric quantity, it
has morphed into a “substance,” or cosmic inventory, described
by T µν , upon this standard operational procedure. Nevertheless,
it is rightfully not regarded a physical constituent of the Universe, but simply a mathematical formalism, contributing an effective or artificial contribution to T µν . On the other hand, Λ is
usually regarded as a real physical cosmic inventory in ΛCDM,
which contributes to T µν basically in the same manner as matter
and radiation.
The Friedmann equation in modern language reads as
H 2 (t) =


8πG 
ρr (t) + ρb (t) + ρCDM (t) + ρk (t) + ρΛ (t) ,
3c2

with the time-dependent background energy densities for radiation (ρr ), baryons (ρb ), CDM (ρCDM ), the curvature (ρk ), as well
as the cosmological constant (ρΛ ). H(t) is the Hubble parameter and its present-day value3 , the Hubble constant, is denoted as
H0 . The critical density, defining a flat universe, is given by
ρcrit,t =

3H 2 (t)c2
,
8πG

which Friedmann called the deceleration equation. In recent literature it is called the acceleration equation.

(9)

derived from (5) with vanishing curvature term. It is convenient
to introduce the so-called density parameters or cosmological
parameters
Ωt,i =

ρi (t)
,
ρcrit,t

(10)

where i = CDM, b, r, etc., and which are nothing but the background energy densities relative to the critical density (9).
In order to solve the Friedmann equation, customarily, the
energy conservation equation is applied (for each component
i =CDM, b, r,...), which reads
∂ρi
+ 3H (ρi + pi ) = 0,
∂t

(11)

where ρi and pi stand for the respective background energy densities and pressures4 . The energy densities and pressures are each
related by their respective EoS,
pi (t) = wi (t)ρi (t),

(7)

(8)

(12)

3
The literature has adopted the notational subscript “0” to denote
present-day values, not the values at t = 0.
4
This equation assumes that there is no transformation between different components.

Article number, page 3 of 18

A&A proofs: manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv

where wi is often called the EoS parameter, which can also
change with time, in general. However, in ΛCDM, wi is assumed
to be a constant5 for every component i =CDM, b, r, Λ and k.
Assuming a constant EoS parameter wi and using (12) in (11), it
follows that ρ̇i /ρi = −3(1 + wi )ȧ/a, which is readily integrated to
yield the well-known relation
ρi (a) = Ωi,0 ρcrit,0 a−3(1+wi ) ,

(13)

which describes the evolution of the background energy densities as a function of the scale factor a for constant wi . The
background evolution of the standard cosmic components is thus
given by
ρr (a) = Ωr,0 ρcrit,0 /a4

(14a)

3

ρm (a) = Ωm,0 ρcrit,0 /a

(14b)

ρk (a) = Ωk,0 ρcrit,0 /a2
ρΛ = ΩΛ,0 ρcrit,0 ,

(14c)
(14d)

with (14a) for radiation (its EoS parameter in (12) is wr = 1/3);
(14b) for baryonic matter and for CDM (wm = 0); (14c) for curvature (wk = −1/3), and (14d) for the cosmological constant Λ
(wΛ = −1).
The Friedmann equation can be alternatively written as an algebraic closure condition. At the present, it reads
1 = Ωr,0 + Ωb,0 + ΩCDM,0 + Ωk,0 + ΩΛ,0 .

(15)

In other words, Eq. (15) is the normalization of the Friedmann
equation (8) to the critical density.

3. The Flat Universe Interpretation
The ΛCDM model is a member of the broader family of FLRW
cosmological models. Furthermore, a flat space in the Universe
is assumed on the grounds of the curvature of space, as measured
for example by the observations of the CMB – the flat universe
interpretation, where the curvature term in the Friedmann equation (5) is customarily interpreted to express the geometry of the
Universe. We will now reassess this interpretation.
3.1. Curvature in FLRW Universes

Let us elaborate on the curvature term appearing in the Friedmann equation (5), which is connected to the curvature factor
in the FLRW metric (3). The derivation of Eq. (5), see for example Kolb & Turner (1990), suggests that the curvature term
should not be confused with a contribution to the energy momentum tensor, which determines the Riemann tensor in the Einstein
equations (2). It is these equations which ought to determine the
global curvature of space in the Universe. We now reevaluate the
interpretation of the curvature term of Eq. (5), in order to discuss
whether it describes the global curvature of space or not, as follows.
In a first step, we use the Einstein equations (2) only, which
describe the curvature of space, determined by the energy momentum tensor T µν , that describes the distribution of energy (or
matter) in the Universe. Presuming the cosmological principle,
5
However, for a detailed study of phase transitions in the early Universe, it is important to include e.g. a variable EoS of the radiation component, in order to take into account the reduction of relativistic degrees
of freedom in the wake of the Universe’s expansion.

Article number, page 4 of 18

T µν takes the form for a perfect fluid, given in Eq. (4), where the
respective densities and pressures of the cosmic components of
interest are considered. Applying T µν and solving the Einstein
equations (2) yields the metric tensor gµν , which describes the
global curvature of space in the Universe. Considering, for example, the EdS universe, we apply T µν with the density at critical
density and zero pressure for pressureless matter, which yields a
non-flat metric tensor gµν . This is easily seen in a kind of crosscheck by solving the Friedmann equation for the EdS universe
H 2 = (8πG/3c2 )ρcrit , which yields H 2 (a) ∝ a−3 . Thus, we see a
deceleration of the expansion rate H in the course of the expansion of the EdS universe, which is caused by gravity (see e.g.,
Peacock (1999)). It is important to note that no curvature term
appears in Eq. (5) for the EdS universe.
In a second step, we follow the steps of the derivation of the
Friedmann equation (5), described in Sec. 2 and reverse the procedure of step one. In contrast to the procedure of step one, determining the curvature of space for a given T µν , we start by specifying the metric tensor gµν corresponding to the curvature term
of Eq. (5). Applying this metric tensor gµν to the Einstein equations (2) yields T µν of the corresponding energy densities6 . The
obtained energy momentum tensor(s) is(are) checked for agreement with the one we used in the first step. We continue with
the example of the EdS universe: the curvature term in (5) vanishes for the EdS universe and the corresponding metric tensor
gµν describes flat space, which yields the energy momentum tensor T µν of empty space. This is different from a space at critical density in the EdS universe. Thus, in general, the curvature
term does not express the spatial curvature7 . This is addressed
by Robertson (1936a), by using an “auxiliary” (mathematical)
space associated with the FLRW metric (3) (based on Riemannian geometry), which categorizes the dynamics of expansion of
the background universe via the curvature index k ∈ {−1, +1, 0}
as open (negative curvature), closed (positive curvature) and flat
(no curvature), based on the energy density of the background
universe relative to the critical density8 . Walker (1937) uses the
term “Riemannian space” for the space connected to the metric.
However, with regard to ΛCDM, the question arises as to how
it is possible that observations of the CMB report the flatness of
space given that the Universe is not empty, which we discuss as
follows. The Friedmann equation (5) describes the dynamics of
the expansion of the background universe, expressed by the evolution of the expansion rate H(t) in the local reference frame of
observers comoving with the expansion, moving on geodesics,
that is freely falling FLRW observers9 . The expansion rate H(t)
is determined by the two contributing terms describing the evolution of the density and the curvature, determined by Eqs. (14).
A consequence of the equivalence principle of general relativity
(GR) is that observers, freely falling in a gravitational potential,
reside in a local inertial system, where special relativity (SR) ap6

In general, this solution is not unique.
To falsify the assumption that the curvature term in Eq. (5) expresses the curvature of space, one contradicting example is sufficient.
8
The definition of k refers to the density although the density does
not appear in the metric. In the FLRW formalism this is addressed by
the normalized Friedmann equation (15), relating density and curvature.
Consequently, in the FLRW formalism, the density parameters of subcritical and supercritical universes are also normalized to critical density, for example by considering the suitable amount of curvature. Remember, the curvature is not regarded as a physical contribution to the
energy budget of the Universe.
9
The comoving observer is called fundamental observer by Robertson (1935). This term is also sometimes used in the literature.
7

Horst Foidl and Tanja Rindler-Daller: A ΛCDM Extension Explaining the Hubble Tension and the Spatial Curvature

plies, that is, they perceive flat space (see e.g., Weinberg (1972,
2008), Peacock (1999) or Fließbach (2016)). Moreover, a consequence of this is, that space appearing flat to comoving FLRW
observers is irrespective of the energy density of the model universe. Thus, space appears flat to comoving observers in open,
closed and flat universes, justifying ρk = 0 and Ωk,0 = 0 in the
ΛCDM model and provides the reason for the observation of the
flatness of space, not necessarily connected to the critical density. This again suggests that the curvature term in the Friedmann
equation Eqs. (5) and (8) does not express the global spatial curvature, as determined by the Einstein equations (2).
Therefore, the interpretation of the curvature term in Eq. (5) is
still a pending question, as the term is not related to ρk and Ωk,0 ,
respectively, which express the observed flatness of space, by us
as free-falling FLRW observers10 .

However, there are no comprehensible arguments, why the big
bang should be restricted to this exclusive fine-tuned value for
Hini . In case Hini is less than Hcrit (or in other words, the ρini is
higher than ρcrit , in order to fulfill Eq. (18)), the evolution of the
universe is described by a closed geometry. An open geometry
is determined by Hini greater than Hcrit (or ρini being lower than
ρcrit , fulfilling Eq. (18)).
Limiting ourselves to a flat geometry and given the energy
densities as deduced by the measurements of the CMB (e.g., by
Planck-Collaboration (2020)) in ΛCDM, it thereby ignores from
the outset a broad range of possible initial expansion rates Hini .
Hence, the assumption of a flat geometry in the FLRW metric
does not cover those initial expansion rates Hini , which would
lead to subcritical and supercritical universes, where, as shown
in Sec. 3.1, freely falling, comoving observers likewise perceive
flat space.

3.2. The Initial Conditions of FLRW Universes

Customarily, the geometry (open, closed or flat) of a model universe is explained based on the energy density of the background
universe relative to the critical density. We present a more general definition based on the ICs of the background universe, comprising of the initial densities in the early Universe, as well as the
initial (post big bang) expansion rate.
The expansion rate for a universe at critical density is described by the Friedmann equation with vanishing curvature
term
H2 =

8πG
ρcrit ,
3c2

(16)

This relation between expansion rate H and ρcrit holds true for
the entire cosmic time. In particular, also in the very first moments after the big bang. More precisely, the initial boost in the
expansion rate is supposed to be provided immediately after the
big bang. By the time we can apply GR, we can define an initial
expansion rate Hini (in the language of Lemaître, we could call
it here “the primeval expansion rate”). As of this cosmic point
in time, when we can meaningfully talk about the Friedmann
equation, the Universe experienced its first deceleration phase
(see e.g. Harrison (2000)), and the metric would appear flat for a
comoving FLRW observer.
On the other hand, we can express the critical density for a flat
universe by
ρcrit =

2 2
3Hini
c
,
8πG

(17)

which is simply Eq. (16) rearranged to express ρcrit at the considered initial point in time. This defines the “critical expansion
rate,” for a given initial density as
2
Hcrit
=

8πG
ρini .
3c2

(18)

We can interpret this relation as follows. Given an arbitrary initial energy density ρini of a universe, originating from the big
bang, the primeval expansion rate Hini has to be specifically finetuned, in order to fulfill criterion (18) describing a universe with
flat geometry, that is Hini = Hcrit .
10
The fact that we are not perfect FLRW observers has ramifications,
which we study in Section 7.

4. A ΛCDM Extension to incorporate the Initial
Conditions
In Sec. 3.1, we argue that a prospective observation of flat space
does not necessarily imply a universe at critical density, since
the curvature terms ρk and Ωk in Eqs. (8) and (15), respectively,
vanish in the local inertial frame of comoving FLRW observers,
giving the reasons for the flatness of space as measured by the
observations of the CMB. In order to interpret the curvature term
in Eq. (5), we associate the general concept of DE with the geometry of the FLRW metric (3) and use the subscript “de” for
the quantities describing the dynamics of expansion in the forthcoming.
In Sec. 3.2 we argue that the ICs of the background universe are given by the initial expansion rate Hini and the initial
densities. Based on the CMB measurements, within the ΛCDM
model, the initial densities are determined to high precision (see
also Foidl & Rindler-Daller (2024)). For this reason, it is sufficient to incorporate Hini into the ΛCDM formalism. Let us proceed in our approach by considering the following parameters
1 = Ωr,0 + Ωb,0 + ΩCDM,0 + Ωk,0 + Ωde,0 ,

(19)

where the operationally defined density parameter of the geometrical curvature Ωde takes the place of ΩΛ . For the sake of
completeness, we include Ωk = 0 in the equation, in order to
express the perceived flatness of space. In the same way as in
ΛCDM, Ωk,0 = 0 describes the flatness of space, based on novel
arguments, though, as it appears to us in our local reference
frame as comoving FLRW observers.
In order to proceed with our approach, in an inflationary big
bang cosmology, we allow for the following simplification. We
analyze the evolution of cosmological models by the time inflation has ended and we call the expansion rate at the end of inflation “primordial expansion rate” (in analogy to the primordial
power spectrum in structure formation). Detailed information of
the exact evolution of H prior to this point is not required.
We recognize from Eq. (19)
Ωde,0 = 1 − Ωphys,0 ,

(20)

where Ωphys,0 denotes the sum total of the density parameters
(ΩCDM,0 , Ωb,0 , Ωr,0 ) of all physical contributions to the energy
Article number, page 5 of 18

A&A proofs: manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv

budget of the universe (CDM, baryons, radiation; without consideration of the operationally defined contributions, Ωk,0 and
Ωde,0 , to the energy momentum tensor T µν ).

flat and closed geometries, as is also the case in ΛCDM (with
wk = −1/3). For open geometries, we apply Eq. (24). In summary, we have

We rewrite the Friedmann equation (5), by multiplying Eq. (5)
by a2 (t) and divide it by 2, and where we use the total amount of
energy (4π/3)ρphys a3 in the sphere of radius (scale factor) a, in
units of the critical density (see Eq. (20)), instead of the respective energy density ρphys , which yields

1
2
wde,early = − − Θ(Ωde,0 ) Ωde,0
3
3

GΩphys
1 2
ȧ (t) −
= κ,
2
a
with the constant κ.

(21)

We use the EoS parameter of ρde to parameterize the dynamics of the expansion, determined by the curvature index in the
FLRW metric, as a function of the sum total of the energy densities of the cosmic components in the Universe Ωphys , which
retains the customary ΛCDM formalism, while we are only left
to adapt the computation of wde .
So, we use now Eq. (21) to determine wde as follows. Since κ
is a constant, the evolution of the first term is determined by the
evolution of the second term, given by
!
Ωphys
d GΩphys
∝− 2 .
(22)
da
a
a
which is, unsurprisingly, equivalent to Eq. (14c). (In what follows, we do not need detailed prefactors.) We use relation (22)
in Eq. (13) which yields
ρde ∝ a−2Ωphys,0 ,

(23)

and equate the exponents in (23) and ρk ∝ a
rearranged to express wde it reads as

−3(1+w)

2
Ωphys,0 − 1,
3
where wde is constant.
wde =

[see Eq. (13)],

(24)

The significant property of (24) is the fact that, in general,
it does not yield the EoS of a cosmological constant. Only for
an empty universe, we do exactly get wde = −1. In fact, this
is in nice accordance with the original empty de Sitter universe
solution (de Sitter (1917)) and the expectations from a kinematically determined universe: If the universe is empty, there is no
global curvature of space, and hence no deceleration, such that
H = const, resulting in an exponential growth of the scale factor.
As soon as we have cosmic components, Ωphys,0 > 0, the
EoS parameter in (24) fulfills wde > −1. If we choose the same
matter content as the ΛCDM concordance model, i.e., using
Ωphys,0 ≈ Ωm,0 ≃ 0.3, Eq. (24) yields wde ≃ −0.8, thus there is
a weak deceleration, compared to a model with wΛ = −1. Still,
the two EoS parameters are close numerically and in terms of
their phenomenological impact onto the expansion history (see
Section 6).
On the other hand, if we assume a universe at critical density,
that is Ωphys,0 = 1, yields wde = −1/3, which is the EoS parameter of the spatial curvature used in the FLRW formalism, and
which is restricted to the fine-tuned case of a universe at critical
density. This is exactly what we expect.
To retain ΛCDM’s formalism and Eq. (13), we make a distinction of cases. We apply the constant value of wde = −1/3 to
Article number, page 6 of 18

Ωde,0 = 1 − Ωphys,0

(25a)
(25b)

where in Eq. (25a) Θ is the Heaviside function. The EoS parameter wde,early is a function of Ωde,0 [see Eq. (25b)], and therefore
a constant for a given total of energy densities. We use the additional subscript “early” to express that this is the initial value
for the EoS parameter in the early Universe. In Sec. 5, we will
show that in the regime of nonlinear structure formation, the
EoS will morph from a constant value to a time-dependent (or
scale-factor-dependent) function. The Heaviside function separates the two regimes of super- and subcritical model universes.
The first term corresponds to deceleration due to the critical density. The factor after the Heaviside function applies to subcritical universes only, where wde,early falls below −1/3, that is a decreasing EoS parameter implies less deceleration, as it should.
In addition, we retain Ωk = 0 to express the perceived flatness
of space, in our local inertial system (as comoving FLRW observers), just the same way as in ΛCDM. This is essential to linear perturbation theory applied in ΛCDM, when, for example,
calculating the CMB temperature spectrum, as the notion “curvature” herein refers to spatial curvature in the Einstein equations (see e.g., Ma & Bertschinger (1995); Weinberg (2008);
Coles & Lucchin (2002); Mukhanov (2005); Dodelson (2003);
Peebles (1993)), and not to the geometry of the FLRW metric. A
description of how the spatial curvature affects the CMB temperature spectrum can be found in many textbooks covering structure formation, see the aforementioned references. But there is
a degeneracy for the impact of spatial curvature on the CMB
spectrum with the cosmological constant Λ or dark energy, respectively; see for example, Hu & Dodelson (2002). We will get
back to this point in Sec. 7.
Finally, the Friedmann equation reads

8πG 
ρr (t) + ρb (t) + ρCDM (t) + ρde (t)
2
3c
ρde (a) = Ωde,0 ρcrit,0 a−3(1+wde,early ) ,
H 2 (t) =

(26a)
(26b)

where Eq. (26b) now describes the evolution of ρde as a function
of scale factor a for a constant wde,early , given by Eqs. (25). The
present-day critical density ρcrit,0 is defined in (9).
Figure 1 finally displays the evolution of the scale factors of
model universes with various matter densities, color-coded by
density parameter Ωm , whose value refers to the present, within
our ΛCDM extension, from reddish for universes with closed
geometry; the yellow one has exactly the critical density, that
is the EdS universe, which separates the supercritical from the
subcritical universes, which go from light green to deep blue for
the empty universe. The curves between the yellow and the dark
blue curve depict the evolution of subcritical models with matter densities between the EdS model with critical density (solid
yellow curve), and the empty model (solid dark blue curve). We
can see that the cosmological models transition uniformly between these two limiting model cases, corresponding to decreasing mass density, and “approaching” the exponential curve of the
empty model, exactly as expected for kinematically determined
universes in GR. In fact, a universe filled with a cosmological

Horst Foidl and Tanja Rindler-Daller: A ΛCDM Extension Explaining the Hubble Tension and the Spatial Curvature

scale factor a

2.5
2.0

m = 6.0
m = 1.0
m = 0.3
m = 0.0
m = 0.3

de = 5 wde =
de = 0.0 wde =
de = 0.7 wde =
de = 1.0 wde =

= 0.7

0.33
0.33
0.80
1.00
CDM

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0 -15.0-10.0 -5.0 0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0

0.0 empty
0.1
0.2
0.3 ( CDM)
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0 EdS
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0

matter density

3.0

cosmic time [Gyr]

Fig. 1. Expansion histories of model universes within the ΛCDM extension. The color-coded curves display the expansion history of individual model universes applying Eq. (26), for models with supercritical
density (dark red), to the EdS model (yellow), to the empty de Sitter universe (dark blue). The black curve indicates the expansion history of the
original ΛCDM model with Ωm = 0.3, ΩΛ = 0.7, assuming a cosmological constant, i.e. wΛ = −1. Comparing ΛCDM to the model shown for
the same matter density and Ωde = 0.7 (thick light-blue curve), we see
a great similarity. This model displays the same characteristic s-shape,
indicating the transition from decelerated to accelerated expansion, because of wde = −0.8 being “close” to a cosmological constant, given the
relatively low energy density observed in the Universe.

constant to critical density displays the same evolution as the expectations for an empty universe, in the former by pressure balancing gravity11 , in the latter by vanishing gravity in an empty
universe.
The black solid curve indicates the evolution of the ΛCDM
model with Ωm = 0.3 and the cosmological constant ΩΛ = 0.7.
Comparing it to the solution obtained by our ΛCDM extension
with Ωde = 0.7 and wde = −0.8 for a model universe with identical amount of matter Ωm = 0.3 (thick solid blue line), we
recognize the similarity between both models. Both display the
typical s-shape in the evolution of the scale factor, indicating
the transition from decelerated to accelerated expansion, known
from ΛCDM. There is a difference in the age between the two
world models, however. We discuss this finding and other features, along with the results of exact calculations in Sec. 6. Moreover, the evolution of supercritical model universes with matter densities above the critical density match the expectation, as
well. They display no deviations from conventional computations, with respect to the evolution of their scale factors.
This approach shows a significant difference to the cosmological constant Λ, that is considered a physical content of the Universe. But unlike the cosmological constant Λ, ρde now does not
contribute to the energy budget of the Universe, instead it refers
to a kinematic effect, described by an effective DE component
emerging from the geometry of the FLRW metric. As such it is
considered an operational contribution to the energy momentum
tensor [Eq. (8)] and is not regarded as a physical contribution to
the Universe. Just in the same way as ρk in ΛCDM, obviously.
Though it seems to be only a minor modification, it is a signif11

This scenario also applies to the inflationary phase of the Universe,
when p ≈ −ρ of the inflaton field dominated the Universe, resulting in
an exponential growth of the scale factor.

icant difference to the ΛCDM model, as the Universe, in this
approach, is considered an open universe with subcritical energy
density, as the sum total of the energy densities of the physical contributions (radiation and matter) to the energy budget of
the universe is below critical density. Finally, Ωk,0 = 0 refers
to the perceived flatness of space in the local inertial system of
the comoving FLRW observer, in contrast to ΛCDM, where it is
interpreted as the global flatness of space.

5. The Expansion History in the Nonlinear Regime
In Sec. 4, we presented an extension to ΛCDM, which abandons the cosmological constant Λ in favor of an approach that
describes the DE phenomenology as a kinematic effect, induced
by the primeval expansion rate Hini post big bang in relation to
the initial density, in order to extend the ΛCDM model beyond
the fine-tuned case of a Universe at critical density.
In ΛCDM, the nonlinear stage of structure formation is assumed to have no impact on the evolution of the background
universe. In this section, we reassess the possibility of such an
impact. More precisely, we investigate the impact of the formation of the cosmic web, in particular of its voids, onto the expansion history. We can show that there is an impact which is minor,
but significant enough to explain the Hubble tension problem, on
which we elaborate in detail below.
In order to motivate our approach, we reconsider first the ideas
around the issue of a backreaction from structure formation, particularly in the late stages of the evolution of the cosmic web,
since by then voids dominate the volume of the Universe.
5.1. The evolution of the voids

The pioneering work of Icke (1984) showed that voids evolve
into spherical shape and become distributed homogeneously during the formation of the cosmic web. The following works by
Icke & van de Weygaert (1987), van de Weygaert & Icke (1989)
and van de Weygaert (1994) presented analytical descriptions of
the evolution of the cosmic web, based on the Voronoi tesselation (Voronoi (1908), see also Okabe et al. (2000)). Icke & van de
Weygaert (1991) confirmed the correctness of this approach by
comparing it to observations. Analytical approximations are presented in Icke (2001), which describe the evolution of the individual components of the cosmic web as Voronoi features, which
we display here
mv =e−3θ

(27a)
1−e



m f =3e−θ 1 − e−θ

3
mn = 1 − e−θ ,

2

mw =3e

−2θ





−θ

(27b)
(27c)
(27d)

where θ is a measure of time, with θ ∝ t2/3 in an EdS universe.
The quantities m x denote the mass fractions of the individual
components of the cosmic web: (a) mv for the voids, (b) mw for
the walls, (c) m f for the filaments and (d) mn for the nodes.
As voids became a subject of interest, Colberg et al. (2005)
and Shandarin et al. (2006) derived density profiles, shapes and
sizes from cosmological simulations. Ricciardelli et al. (2013)
showed that voids display a universal density profile. Cautun
Article number, page 7 of 18

A&A proofs: manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv

et al. (2014) derived the evolution history of the individual components of the cosmic web from the Millennium simulation of
Springel et al. (2005).
5.2. The backreaction problem

The expansion history of the Universe in the ΛCDM model is
determined by the solution of the Friedmann equations, applying the average energy density of the background universe. This
is a valid approach, as long as the distribution of the energy densities can be considered homogeneous and isotropic, that is in
the early Universe. However, the cosmological principle is not
valid anymore in the late Universe on spatial scales of the order
of approximately Gpc and below. Thus, averaging the density of
the Universe and solving the Friedmann equations by neglecting
this nonlinear structure formation seems to be problematic. This
is known in cosmology as the averaging problem. The theoretical background of this problem arises from the nonlinearity of
the Einstein equations
Eµν =

8πG
T µν ,
c4

(28)

first pointed out by Ellis (1983). Averaging the metric in an inhomogeneous environment first, before solving the Einstein equations, will lead to an additional correction term Cµν in the averaged Einstein equations:
⟨Eµν ⟩ =

8πG
⟨T µν ⟩ + Cµν .
c4

(29)

The questions to be addressed are the following: (a) can this term
reach relevant orders of magnitude to influence the expansion
history of the Universe? (b) does perturbation theory eventually
break down?
In ΛCDM it is assumed that the correction term Cµν is negligible. On the other hand, if this term would be found to impact the
expansion history, it would be seen as a backreaction process,
caused by inhomogeneities onto the background universe.
The questions (a) and (b) have been explored in the literature, providing basically the following answers: in case the size
of perturbations is much less than the (time-dependent) Hubble
sphere, the correction term does not have substantial impact on
the expansion history and can be neglected. This means it cannot explain the phenomenology of the accelerated expansion, see
e.g. Kolb et al. (2005), Notari (2006), Li & Schwarz (2007),
Räsänen (2006a), Buchert (2000, 2001), Kwan et al. (2009),
Paranjape (2009).
Paranjape (2009) explored the averaging problem and its importance in cosmology in a mathematically rigorous way. They
constructed a toy universe based on the Lemaître-Tolman-Bondi
(LTB) metric (Lemaître (1933); Lemaître & MacCallum (1997);
Tolman (1934); Bondi (1947)). The key property of this metric is
that it allows radial inhomogeneities, while preserving isotropy.
Their model was centered at an over-dense spherical region – a
model for a formed dark matter halo –, surrounded by an underdense shell. The remaining part of the universe was regarded homogeneous out to the Hubble sphere. They found that the value
of the correction term Cµν induced by the inhomogeneity is too
small, in order to have an impact onto the expansion history,
justifying the assumptions of ΛCDM. However, while the toy
model analyzed in Paranjape (2009) perfectly fits to the regime
of halo formation and virialization, it does not apply to the late
Article number, page 8 of 18

stages of cosmic web formation, once voids dominate the volume of the Universe.
Buchert (2011) also investigated the averaging problem, based
on the LTB metric, and finds that the global backreaction in a flat
LTB model vanishes in a spherical domain. This result is compatible with the interpretation of the Universe to appear homogeneous, if we chose a large enough spatial scale, i.e. ≳ 100 Mpc
at the present (Hogg et al. (2005); Scrimgeour et al. (2012)), justifying the assumptions in ΛCDM. Moreover, Buchert & Ehlers
(1997) have shown that in 3D-torus architecture global backreaction vanishes, as well, meaning that in cosmological simulations
with periodic boundary conditions backreactions cannot appear.
5.3. The backreaction from voids

Although backreaction from the averaging problem has been
shown to vanish in LTB models, Buchert et al. (2015) demonstrated that there is no proof that backreaction by inhomogeneities is negliglible, in general, in cosmology. Furthermore,
it has been pointed out e.g. by Amendola & Tsujikawa (2010);
Kolb et al. (2005) that the result of the averaging problem is very
sensitive to the way the average is performed.
In this paper, we reconsider the averaging problem as applied to the late stages, when voids dominate the volume of the
Universe. More precisely, we distinguish the impact of density
vs volume. In the late stages of nonlinear structure formation,
the Universe is dominated in volume by a homogeneous distribution of spherical voids of very low density, embedded in a
highly over-dense region, which occupies only a minor fraction
of the volume of the Universe. This picture is compatible with
the general-relativistic “separate universe conjecture” (Weinberg
(2008)), which states that a spherically symmetric region in a homogeneous and isotropic universe behaves like a mini universe.
There are three approaches, which each can support the conjecture that voids as the dominating volume fraction of the Universe influence the expansion history: a) a phenomenological
approach; b) a backreaction process; c) results of simulations;
supported by d) results from observations, as discussed next.
a) phenomenological approach
Following the separate universe conjecture, every void can be
considered a mini universe, having its own expansion rate. Moreover, we do not consider the evolution of a single void, but in a
holistic view, we consider the entire Hubble sphere.
The expansion rate of the Universe decreases with time, due to
the action of gravity. This deceleration is determined by the gravitational forces FG between any two points (p1 , p2 ) in the homogeneous universe. Following Birkhoff’s theorem (Birkhoff &
Langer (1923); Jebsen (1921, 2005); Maciel et al. (2018)), gravitational forces in a homogeneous sphere are proportional to the
distance r between any point p from the center pc : FG ∝ r(p, pc ).
Considering points p x at the edge of a over-dense region surrounding a very under-dense void, yields the usual Newtonian
law of gravity FG ∝ 1/r2 (p x , pc ). This can be applied to the scenario, where voids are embedded in an over-dense environment,
showing that deceleration in the voids is less pronounced than in
the surrounding cosmic web. Alternatively, this can also be seen
by the Birkhoff’s theorem for the spherical low-density voids,
yielding a lower gravitational force within the voids compared
to their higher-density homogeneous environment. This means
that voids are experiencing an accelerated expansion, compared

Horst Foidl and Tanja Rindler-Daller: A ΛCDM Extension Explaining the Hubble Tension and the Spatial Curvature

to their higher-density homogeneous environment. As long as
voids do not dominate the volume of the Universe, this expansion can be compensated by the “congestion” of the over-dense
walls and filaments. As soon as voids begin to dominate the volume of the Universe, this compensation fails. Voids dominate
the volume of the Universe and therefore the expansion of the
Universe, as it is directly connected to the volume of the voids.
b) backreaction process
The solutions to the averaging problem which we present in
Sec. 5.2 consider the size of inhomogeneities clearly smaller
than the Hubble radius. Therefore, it is always possible to find a
minimum spatial scale, above which the Universe can be considered homogeneous, yielding no impact on the expansion history.
However, as studies have shown, in case perturbations are
of the size of the Hubble radius or even larger (“superhorizon
modes”), the correction term can grow to significant values, and
therefore may impact the expansion history of the Universe,
which appears as a classical (zero-momentum) background (see
e.g. Carloni et al. (2008), Martineau & Brandenberger (2005),
Barausse et al. (2005), Kolb et al. (2005), Parry (2006), Kumar
& Flanagan (2008), Hirata & Seljak (2005), Flanagan (2005),
Räsänen (2006b), Geshnizjani et al. (2005)). This topic is subject to controversial discussions, and it has been even questioned
if such huge perturbations exist at all (see e.g. Carloni et al.
(2008), Stoeger et al. (2007), Wetterich (2003), Calzetta et al.
(2001), Siegel & Fry (2005), Gasperini et al. (2009), Gruzinov
et al. (2006), Notari (2006), Van Acoleyen (2008)).
Yet, relativistic perturbation theory does predict superhorizon perturbations, and as the Hubble sphere grows over time,
more and more such perturbations enter that sphere (perturbations leave the sphere, once the scale factor grows exponentially
and H = const). Either way, it appears that these superhorizon
perturbations are far too subdominant to source a backreaction
process onto the background evolution, in order to explain the
phenomenology of the accelerated expansion.
In our model, we take into account the evolutionary stage of
the cosmic web, once voids dominate the volume of the Universe, that is low-density spherically symmetric voids are embedded in a highly over-dense homogeneous background. Furthermore, we consider the impact of the entire cosmic web on
the backreaction process, meaning we consider the entire Hubble sphere. Therefore, we can regard the entirety of all voids as
one huge extreme low-density region – appearing as a classical
(zero-momentum) background, see for example, Barausse et al.
(2005), Kolb et al. (2005)).
c) backreaction via spatial averaging
Let us add another aspect of the backreaction. In Buchert et al.
(2015) it was shown that, in general, there is no proof that inhomogeneities are negligible in background cosmology. Nevertheless, the success of the ΛCDM model suggests that any impact
of inhomogeneities on the expansion rate should be weak. However, in Wiltshire (2007, 2011) it was shown that particularly in
the late stages of the evolution of the cosmic web, averaging and
coarse-graining is a problematic procedure.
Rácz et al. (2017) performed a cosmological N-body simulation, integrating the Newtonian equations, as is customary in
cosmological simulations (e.g., Springel et al. (2005)), with a
changing general-relativistic metric, which is calculated from

spatially averaged quantities. The result indicated that for a typical spatial scale of the averaging procedure, an impact onto the
expansion history with deviations from the results based on the
FLRW metric is possible.
Before we close this section, we reiterate that all studies indicate that the backreaction onto the background evolution, including the backreaction from voids, cannot “explain away” the
phenomenology of accelerated expansion. However, by including the minor backreaction of voids that we find, we can possibly
resolve the Hubble tension problem, as shown below.
d) results from observations
As discussed in a later section, recent work by e.g., Dainotti
et al. (2022b, 2021, 2022a); Bargiacchi et al. (2023b,a); Ó Colgáin et al. (2021) and Krishnan et al. (2021), indicate that the
evolution of the expansion rate H at low redshift is in conflict
with the assumption of a cosmological constant. These results
may indicate that the origin of the Hubble tension is likely to be
in cosmology and not in local measurement issues, where a dynamical DE component, our proposed model, or a backreaction
from the late stages of structure formation might each a priori
constitute a solution.
5.4. Including Backreaction into the ΛCDM Extension

There is a straightforward approach to incorporate the backreaction from the cosmic web and its voids into the ΛCDM extension, and at the same time to quantify the corresponding impact
onto the expansion history, as follows. We apply the hydrodynamical and geometrical models from Icke (1984), Icke & van de
Weygaert (1987) and Icke (2001) for the formation of the cosmic
web and extract the relevant quantities from the analysis by Cautun et al. (2014) of the Millennium simulation. The advantage
of this procedure is the fact that the large-scale structure of the
Universe in our model is informed by cosmological ΛCDM simulations, which are in good agreement with observations, that is
with large galaxy surveys on scales of the cosmic web.
In the ΛCDM extension, which we presented in Sec. 4, the
cosmological constant Λ is replaced by an “operational dark energy”, where the associated EoS is given in Eqs. (25). As previously mentioned, the expansion of the voids is directly connected
to the expansion of the Universe by their dominance in volume and their low density. Therefore, it is straightforward to express the impact from voids onto the expansion history through
the EoS of ρde . As a result, the initially constant EoS parameter wde,early morphs into a time-dependent function. This makes
sense, because voids become important only at the later stages of
structure formation. To quantify this effect, we used the results
derived by Cautun et al. (2014), who analyze the evolution of the
cosmic web and who derive the evolution of the mass fractions
and volume fractions for the individual components of the cosmic web (i.e., voids, filaments, walls, nodes), using the Millennium simulation by Springel et al. (2005). Cautun et al. (2014)
find that voids dominate the volume of the Universe as of a redshift z ∼ 5. The analytical model (27) from Icke (2001) shows
that the matter fraction of the voids evolves linearly in redshift,
to a good approximation, in the late stages of the evolution of the
cosmic web. We applied both findings to our Eqs. (25), in order
to derive the following linear approximation for the evolution
of the EoS parameter of ρde as a function of the scale factor as
follows. We use Eqs. (25) to obtain the wde,early (from parameters
reported by the Planck-Collaboration (2020)) and wde,0 (from the
Article number, page 9 of 18

A&A proofs: manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv

results reported by Cautun et al. (2014)). In the linear evolution
of redshift from z = 5 to z = 0, we use z + 1 = 1/a to express wde
as a function of scale factor a, which yields



a ≤ i1/6
wde,early when
h
wde (a) = 

wde,early + (1/a−1)−5
(wde,early + 0.9)
(30)
5

extension (25), (26) and (30) into the background module of
CLASS, as well as into the perturbation module, because we also
calculated and compared the CMB temperature spectra between
our ΛCDM extension and concordance ΛCDM, as presented in
the course of the next section.
Table 1. Cosmological parameters used in the computations

when a > 1/6.
Thus, the EoS parameter wde becomes a function of cosmic time,
or scale factor, respectively, as indicated in the formula, once the
scale factor has reached the threshold determined by the aforementioned analysis. Using the density parameters of our model
with Ωde,0 = 0.7 and Ωm,0 = 0.3, we get for the present-day EoS
parameter wde (1) ∼ −0.9. Comparing this result with the constant EoS parameter wde,early = −0.8 of Sec. 4, we see that the
impact of voids leads to a more negative EoS parameter, with a
value closer to that of a cosmological constant. In fact, this is an
expected outcome, given the dynamics of voids.
In order to reflect the correct evolution of the background, we
stress that the time-dependence of the EoS parameter requires
a forward-in-time-integration of the energy conservation equation (11) to determine the evolution of the energy density ρde .
Thus, Eqs. (13) and (26b), respectively, cannot be used naively.
Regarding this important point, we refer the reader to Foidl &
Rindler-Daller (2024), where we discuss in detail computational
characteristics for cosmological models with a dynamical dark
energy component and the implications of a decreasing vs increasing EoS parameter.
We mentioned already that the impact of voids makes the EoS
parameter wde more negative, than without this impact. In fact, as
the density within voids decreases while their volume increases,
wde (a) will converge asymptotically to the EoS parameter wde =
−1 of a cosmological constant.

In order to calculate accurately the background evolution of
our ΛCDM extension, and to compare it carefully with the
concordance ΛCDM model and with observations, we use the
open-source cosmological Boltzmann code CLASS 12 , which
is designed, not only to provide a user-friendly way to perform cosmological computations, but also to provide a flexible
coding environment for implementing customized cosmological models. The modular concept makes it possible to enhance
the code, without the risk of compromising existing functionality. The underlying concepts, including an overview of coding conventions, can be found in Lesgourgues (2011). This version uses the Planck 2018 cosmological parameters from PlanckCollaboration (2020), as the default parameter set. Additionally,
the configuration provides different sets of precision configuration files, to reflect varying requirements on precision, which
may be needed in the results or available computation time.
The precision configuration with the highest accuracy is proofed
to be in conformance with the Planck results within a level of
0.01%.
We use the fiducial parameters of the ΛCDM model from
Planck-Collaboration (2020), shown in Table 1, in our calculations. We properly implemented the equations of our ΛCDM
The
code
CLASS
is
publicly
https://lesgourg.github.io/class_public/class.html
Article number, page 10 of 18

available

Value
67.556
2.7255
3.046
5.41867×10−5
3.74847×10−5
0.0482754
0.263771
0.687762
0
0.0925
2.3×10−9
0.9619

Comment

derived from TCMB
derived from Nur
wCDM, ΛCDM

adiabatic ICs

In order to compare the results of our ΛCDM extension to
the concordance ΛCDM model, two CLASS simulations were
run. The first run was performed using the unmodified version
of CLASS. The second run used our amended version of CLASS
with parameters according to Table 1. In what follows, we designate the cosmological constant by Λ, as customary. The effect
of DE in the ΛCDM extension, we denote by ρde , wde and Ωde ,
respectively, for habit’s sake; see Sec. 4. ΛCDM refers to the
concordance model, whereas the ΛCDM extension is denoted
as “wCDM”. This notion is often associated with the specific
CPL parametrization (1), whereas we use it to refer to our own
parametrization in (30).
6.1. Evolution of densities and equation of state

6. Results for the wCDM Extension to ΛCDM

12

Parameter
H0
TCMB [K]
Nur
Ωγ,0
Ων,0
Ωb,0
ΩCDM,0
Ωde,0 , ΩΛ,0
Ωk,0
τreio
As
ns

at

Figure 2 displays the evolution of the energy densities ρi vs
scale factor a, as well as vs proper time, in both models. The
top panel displays the evolution of the densities in the ΛCDM
model, corresponding to the individual components of the Universe, as indicated in the legend. The slopes of the individual
curves are as expected from Eqs. (14). The red solid line depicts Λ, showing a constant evolution as expected for the cosmological constant. The bottom panel displays the evolution of
the energy densities in the wCDM model. In this model, the early
slope of the red curve for ρde corresponds to the EoS parameter
wde,early ≃ −0.8, determined by (25) and (30). The vertical lines
in blue bracket the epoch of big bang nucleosynthesis, between
neutron-proton freeze-out at an/p ∼ 1.3 × 10−10 and nuclei production at anuc ∼ 3.3 × 10−9 , while the vertical lines in red (at
larger scale factor) indicate the time of matter-radiation equality
aeq ∼ 10−4 , followed by recombination arec ∼ 10−3 (the detailed
numbers for the latter depend somewhat more upon the cosmological model). The effect of the backreaction from voids in the
late stages of the evolution is so small that it cannot be recognized in the log-log plot. The evolution of the matter and radiation components indicates no significant differences between the
two models, as expected.
However, the ages of the models differ, as can be seen from the
value of the proper time at the very present. The ΛCDM model
has an age of 13.8 Gyr, whereas the age of the wCDM model

Horst Foidl and Tanja Rindler-Daller: A ΛCDM Extension Explaining the Hubble Tension and the Spatial Curvature

anuc

10 6

scale factor a

proper14 time [Gyr]
10
10

10 2

10 6

0.02
13.04
radiation
baryons
CDM

100

10 6

scale factor a

10 4

10 2

100

Fig. 2. Evolution of energy densities in ΛCDM (top panel) and
wCDM (bottom panel) as a function of scale factor and proper time,
respectively. The top panel displays the evolution of the individual contributions to the energy density of the ΛCDM model according to (14).
The red solid line indicates the evolution of the cosmological constant
Λ. The bottom panel displays the evolution of the individual contributions to the energy densities of the wCDM model. The radiation and
matter components show no differences, compared to ΛCDM. However,
the red solid line for ρde is not a constant, but has a slope, corresponding to wde,early ∼ −0.8, according to (25). Note that the late impact of
voids onto wde,early is not recognizable in the log-log plot. The vertical
lines in blue bracket the epoch of big bang nucleosynthesis, between
neutron-proton freeze-out at an/p ∼ 1.3 · 10−10 and nuclei production
anuc ∼ 3.3 · 10−9 , while the vertical lines in red (at larger scale factor)
indicate the time of matter-radiation equality aeq , followed by recombination arec (see also Fig. 3).

is 13.04 Gyr. In Sec. 6.3, where we discuss the Hubble tension
problem, we will present arguments to show that the lower age
of the wCDM universe is no obstacle for the model.
Figure 3 displays the evolution of the density parameters Ωi
(as indicated in the legends) vs scale factor a and proper time,
respectively, for both models. The panels display both Ωde of
wCDM (red solid curve) and ΩΛ of ΛCDM (red dotted curve).
We can see that Ωde of wCDM gets to be the dominant contribution to the energy budget of the Universe at a smaller scale
factor than ΩΛ of ΛCDM. As an illustration, we include the
green-hatched vertical band which indicates the range of redshifts (resp. scale factors) of the sample of galaxies used by the
Supernova Cosmology Project (Perlmutter et al. (1999)). It was

10 22

10 18

proper14 time [Gyr]
10
10

10

0.99
0.88
0.77
radiation
0.66
baryons
0.55
CDM
CDM+baryons
0.44
de
0.33
0.22
0.11
0.00
10 14 10 12 10 10 10 8

10 6
0.02
13.04
zeq = 3402 zrec = 1089

Supernova Cosmology Project

10 6

scale factor

proper time
[Gyr]1
1

0.54

de

anuc

1058
1051
1044
1037
1030
1023
1016
109
10102 14 10 12 10 10 10 8

10

10 4

i

10 18

10 26

0.02
13.80
radiation
baryons
CDM

aeq
arec

10 22

an/p

density [eV/cm3]

10 26

10 6

aeq
arec

1058
1051
1044
1037
1030
1023
1016
109
10102 14 10 12 10 10 10 8

10

anuc

10

an/p

proper14 time [Gyr]
10

i

10 18

aeq
arec

10 22

an/p

density [eV/cm3]

10 26

0.99
0.88
0.77
0.66
0.55
0.44
0.33
0.22
0.11
0.00
10 1

2 × 10 1

3 × 10

4 × 10

10 4

10 2

6 × 10 1

100
13.04

radiation
baryons
CDM
CDM+baryons
de

Supernova Cosmology Project

scale factor

100

Fig. 3. Evolution of density parameters in ΛCDM and wCDM. The
top panel displays the evolution of the density parameters in the wCDM
model vs scale factor and proper time, respectively. It includes also ΩΛ
of the ΛCDM model (red dotted curve) in order to compare it to Ωde
(red solid curve) of the wCDM model. Vertical lines are the same as in
Fig. 2. The bottom panel displays the same quantities but shows a zoomin to highlight the range of scale factors from a = 0.1 to 1. We see that
Ωde of wCDM gets dominant earlier than ΩΛ of ΛCDM, but that toward
a = 1 the two curves come closer again. As an illustration, the greenhatched vertical band indicates the range of scale factors of the sample
of galaxies used by the Supernova Cosmology Project (Perlmutter et al.
(1999)). More explanations can be found in the main text.

one of the high-redshift SNe Ia surveys that discovered the accelerated expansion in the late 1990s. The bottom panel displays
the same quantities but shows a zoom-in to highlight the range
of scale factors from a = 0.1 to 1. While the advanced Ωde
gets dominant earlier than the cosmological constant Λ, the two
curves come close again at larger a, due to the backreaction from
voids which makes ρde converge to a cosmological constant.
In Figure 4 we show the evolution of the effective EoS parameter for ΛCDM and our wCDM model, respectively. The effective EoS parameter weff (t) = ptot (t)/ρtot (t) is determined by
the time-dependent sum of pressures and densities of all cosmic
components. (Generally, if one component dominates strongly
over the others, weff is close to the EoS parameter of that component.) In the top panel with the scale factor on the lower xaxis, we recognize the early radiation-dominated phase, where
weff = 1/3 to high accuracy. In terms of cosmic time on a linear
Article number, page 11 of 18

A&A proofs: manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv

0.02

13.04
CDM
wCDM

weff

0.33
0.00

H0=72.82
H0=67.56

1019
1015
1011
107

age=13.80 Gyr

103

-0.33

10 1

-0.67

10105 14 10 12 10 10 10 8

-1.00
10 14 10 12 10 10 10 8

10 6

1.00

10 4

10 2

100

CDM
wCDM

0.67
0.33

t(w = 1) = 28.28 Gyr
t(w = 1) = 31.00 Gyr

0.00

10 6

scale factor a

scale factor a

weff

CDM
wCDM

age=13.04 Gyr

aeq
arec

10

1027

anuc

10 6

10

cosmic time [Gyr]

H [1/Mpc]

proper14 time [Gyr]
10

aeq
arec

0.67

10 18

anuc

1.00

10 22

1.0
CDM
0.9
wCDM
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.00.0 1.4 2.8 4.2 5.6 7.0 8.4 9.8 11.2 12.6 14.0

1023

an/p

10 26

Figure 5 shows the expansion history of ΛCDM and wCDM.
The top panel displays the growth of the scale factor a with cos-

an/p

In that bottom panel, we also highlight the evolution of the
effective EoS parameter weff in the far future for the two models.
We can see that, as of a cosmic time of t ∼ 22 Gyr, the weff in both
models, ΛCDM and wCDM, will show no significant difference,
and weff will be very close to −1 by the time of t ∼ 28 Gyr for
ΛCDM and t ∼ 31 Gyr for wCDM. However, while the dominance of Λ as a cosmological constant is attributed to the former,
it is the (relic) kinematic effect of the big bang via Hini in relation to the initial density, respectively, that is responsible for the
dominance of ρde in the latter model.

6.2. Expansion history

scale factor a

x-axis scale in the bottom panel, this phase is so short that it is
seen as a vertical bar along the y-axis. Once matter strongly dominates in the Universe, shortly after aeq , weff drops to zero. In the
latest phase, when Λ begins to dominate the Universe in ΛCDM,
the effective EoS parameter drops to its present-day value of
weff ∼ −0.7. On the other hand, in the wCDM model, the effective EoS parameter initially decreases more rapidly, compared
to ΛCDM. Only by the time the backreaction from voids comes
at play in wCDM, the evolution approaches the one of ΛCDM,
around the present, which can be also seen in the bottom panel
of the figure.

10 4

10 2

100

Fig. 5. Evolution of scale factor and Hubble parameter in ΛCDM
and wCDM. The top panel shows the evolution of the scale factor vs
cosmic time for ΛCDM (blue curve) and wCDM (magenta curve); note
the linear scales in this plot. The wCDM model expands faster than the
ΛCDM model, which can be better recognized in Fig. 6. The bottom
panel shows the evolution of the expansion rate or Hubble parameter H
(displayed in CLASS conventions in units of 1/Mpc) vs scale factor for
both models. Its present-day value H0 differs: ΛCDM has H0 = 67.56
km/s/Mpc, whereas wCDM has H0 = 72.82 km/s/Mpc. Vertical lines in
the bottom panel are the same as in Fig. 2.

mic time t in linear scale for both models. The bottom panel
shows the evolution of the Hubble parameter (i.e., expansion
rate) H vs scale factor a. In wCDM the scale factor grows faster
than in ΛCDM. This results in a younger age of 13.04 Gyr for
wCDM, compared to 13.80 Gyr for ΛCDM.

-0.33
-0.67
-1.000.0 3.1 6.2 9.3 12.4 15.5 18.6 21.7 24.8 27.9 31.0

cosmic time [Gyr]

Fig. 4. Evolution of effective EoS parameter weff in extended and
concordance ΛCDM. The top panel displays the evolution of weff in
both models vs scale factor and proper time, respectively, with the same
vertical lines as in Fig. 2. The bottom panel displays weff vs cosmic time
in linear scale! The cosmic time when weff ≃ −1 is indicated in the plot;
it amounts to ct = 28.28 Gyr for ΛCDM vs 31.0 Gyr for the ΛCDM
extension, respectively.
Article number, page 12 of 18

The present-day value of the expansion rate, the Hubble constant H0 , also differs between the two models: ΛCDM has a
value of H0 = 67.56 km/s/Mpc and wCDM has H0 = 72.82
km/s/Mpc. Of course, the value for ΛCDM is informed by CMB
measurements from Planck, and is part of the parameters provided by CLASS, see Table 1.
Now, in order to illustrate the late impact by voids onto the expansion history of wCDM, compared to ΛCDM, Figure 6 shows
zoom-ins of the evolution of the expansion rate H for a ≥ 10−4

0.00 4
10

CDM
wCDM
H0=72.82
H0=67.56

arec

aeq

103
102
101
100
10 1
10 2
10 3
10 4
10 5
0.05

rel. H

H [1/Mpc]

Horst Foidl and Tanja Rindler-Daller: A ΛCDM Extension Explaining the Hubble Tension and the Spatial Curvature

Camarena and Marra(2020)
Riess et al.(2022)

10 3

10 2

scale factor a

6.3. The Hubble Tension and σ8 -Tension

10 1

100

10 3

rel. H

H [1/Mpc]

CDM
wCDM
H0=72.82
H0=67.56

0.05
0.00 1
10

Camarena and Marra(2020)
Riess et al.(2022)

scale factor a

we cannot use the customary procedure applied in ΛCDM to determine the energy density ρde via (13), as the EoS parameter
wde (a) is not a constant anymore. Hence, we have to perform a
forward-in-time integration of ρde by integrating (11), to solve
the Friedmann equation (8), which we discuss in detail in Foidl
& Rindler-Daller (2024). The consequence of this integration is
that, as wde (a) decreases with time, it leads to a rise in the value
for H0 , and this value is higher compared to the parameterized
Planck value given in Table 1. As a result, the ΛCDM extension
can explain the Hubble tension problem, on which we elaborate
below.

100

Fig. 6. Evolution of Hubble parameter vs scale factor The top panel
shows the evolution of the expansion rate H vs scale factor for ΛCDM
(blue curve) and the ΛCDM extension (magenta curve) and their relative deviation as the gray curve in the bottom of each panel. The panels
just differ in the range of scale factors shown. In the bottom panel, it can
be recognized that the ΛCDM extension expands faster than ΛCDM.
The orange and the blue filled square indicate measurement values of H0
by Camarena & Marra (2020) and Riess et al. (2022), respectively. The
red vertical lines in the top panel are the same as in Fig. 2. In our wCDM
model, the Hubble parameter H increases by ∼ 8 % by the present, compared to that of ΛCDM. As a result, the model provides an explanation
for the Hubble tension problem and agrees with H0 -measurements at
different redshifts.

(top panel) and a ≥ 10−1 (bottom panel). The vertical red lines
indicate the scale factor at matter-radiation equality aeq and at
recombination arec , respectively. The gray solid curve at the bottom of each panel displays the relative deviation of H in wCDM
from its value in ΛCDM. We can clearly see that at the time of
recombination, when the CMB was emitted, there is no difference in H between the models. However, at the late stages of
the evolution, once the impact of the formation of the cosmic
web becomes relevant, the expansion rate in the wCDM model
increases. At a scale factor of a ∼ 0.8, the deviation reaches a
maximum, but then decreases, yielding a value of H0 = 72.82
km/s/Mpc. The bottom panel exemplifies this even more clearly.
Again, this shift to a higher value of H0 by ≈ 8% is due to the
backreaction caused by voids. The origin of the rise of H0 in
our ΛCDM extension is the time-dependence (scale-factor dependence) of the EoS parameter wde (a). As mentioned earlier,

Our wCDM model of the previous section is phenomenologically similar to models of quintessence or “early dark energy”
(EDE), which also propose solutions to the Hubble tension problem. A review on these models is given in Poulin et al. (2023).
The Hubble tension problem refers to the reported discrepancy
between the values13 of H0 derived from measurements of the
CMB vs those derived from measurements in the “local” Universe, using standard candles such as SNe Ia or Cepheid variables. The measurements in the local Universe consistently reveal a higher value of H0 , than the measurements of the CMB.
This problem is discussed for example in Di Valentino et al.
(2021), where two measurement values in the local Universe are
of particular interest to us for a comparison with our ΛCDM extension (see their Fig. 1 and the bottom parts of both panels of
our Figure 6): Riess et al. (2022) with H0 = 73.04 km/s/Mpc
and Camarena & Marra (2020) with H0 = 75.4 km/s/Mpc. The
wCDM model with its value of H0 = 72.82 km/s/Mpc agrees
quite well with the value determined by Riess et al. (2022). The
result of Camarena & Marra (2020) seems to be an outlier, as
their H0 -value is even higher. The explanation for this can be
found in the redshift range of the respective samples of galaxies
for these two measurements. The redshifts of the sample used in
Riess et al. (2022) lie between z = 0.011 and z = 0.02, whereas
the sample in Camarena & Marra (2020) is in a range between
z = 0.023 and z = 0.15. Yet, because wCDM exemplifies a
higher value of H around that same epoch, it can also explain
the results of Camarena & Marra (2020), whose measurement
neatly lies on the maximum of the deviation of H in the wCDM
model, compared to ΛCDM, see Figure 6. This result came quite
as a surprise when we studied this comparison in detail.
Now one of the drawbacks of these attempts is that mitigating the Hubble tension problem increases the σ8 tension (see
e.g. Kamionkowski & Riess (2023)), which has emerged in recent years. This is a measure of the
√ homogeneity of the Universe, where S 8 is defined as σ8 Ωm /0.3, with σ8 being the
standard deviation of the density fluctuation in a sphere of radius
8 h−1 Mpc. A disagreement of more than 4σ has been found between the extrapolation of the CMB temperature fluctuations forward to the present day, and what is measured by multiple probes
of the inhomogeneity in the nearby Universe: The value of S 8
derived from the CMB is higher than that observed in the local
Universe. A mitigation of the Hubble tension (i.e., by increasing
H0 ) increases the σ8 tension. In Rebouças et al. (2024), this was
addressed by assuming a modification of EDE in the late universe, which provides a solution to both problems. However, the
Strictly speaking, H0 refers to H at z = 0, but since the community
casually uses the notation H0 also for any H at low z ≲ 1, we stick to
this convention.
13

Article number, page 13 of 18

A&A proofs: manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv

Now, in order to investigate whether the lower age of the
wCDM model constitutes a problem, we compare some age indicators from the literature, notably estimates for the ages of the
oldest known stars in the Universe. Their ages are estimated basically via two different methods: the abundance of heavy elements, mainly those formed by the r-process in core collapse supernovae; the second way is the determination of the time of the
main sequence turn-off of metal-poor stars in globular clusters.
A short review of methods and observations is given in Weinberg (2008), with age estimates of the oldest stars between 11.514 Gyr, where the error bars are ∼ 2 Gyr. The observations of
metal-poor galaxies by Grebel (2012) and globular clusters in
the local Universe by Grebel (2016) display consistent results,
albeit with larger error bars of 2 − 4 Gyr. A more recent observation, based on the age of the metal-poor globular cluster
NGC 6397 using WFC3/IR photometry is given in Correnti et al.
(2018), showing a similar age range with smaller error bars of
12.6 ± 0.7 Gyr. All these results are consistent with the age of
our wCDM model.
For comparison’s sake, we also computed the age of a ΛCDM
universe using H0 from Riess et al. (2022), while keeping the
other parameters unchanged: the result is 12.50 Gyr. This age
for ΛCDM would also be still on the save side with respect to
the age estimates of the oldest known stars.
Cimatti & Moresco (2023) follow a different approach. They
select the oldest objects from the literature and perform a statistical analysis within a ΛCDM cosmology, in order to determine
the upper limit of H0 compatible with the ages of the selected
objects. They find H0 < 73.0 ± 2.5 km/s/Mpc with a probability
of 93.2 %. So, the “Riess model” is just within these constraints.
Since the expansion rate in wCDM increases only later in time,
it is less affected by this upper limit.
Let us also comment on the early galaxies which have been
found recently by the James Webb Space Telescope, see CurtisLake et al. (2023), Finkelstein et al. (2023) and Robertson et al.
(2023). It has been estimated that these galaxies have formed
only about 320 million years after the big bang. However, we
stress that such estimates require the adoption of a specific cosmological model, in order to convert the measured redshifts into
an age. Adopting a ΛCDM model with the H0 determined by the
Planck telescope, or the H0 determined from the local Universe
(e.g. by Riess et al. (2022)), will in each case shift the age of the
galaxies accordingly, and the same is true if we adopt the wCDM
Article number, page 14 of 18

Recent studies by e.g., Dainotti et al. (2022b, 2021, 2022a);
Bargiacchi et al. (2023b,a); Ó Colgáin et al. (2021) and Krishnan
et al. (2021), indicate that the evolution of the expansion rate H
at low redshift is in conflict with the assumption of a cosmological constant, and dynamical models of DE seem to be preferred.
These results may indicate that the origin of the Hubble tension
is likely to be in cosmology and not in local measurement issues
(e.g. Krishnan et al. (2021)), as observations with increasing accuracy of H0 in the local Universe seem to exacerbate the Hubble tension (e.g. Dainotti et al. (2023) and Khalife et al. (2024)).
The evolution of the expansion rate, shown in Figure 6, displays
a peak in the deviation to ΛCDM at a ∼ 0.8. In fact, the position of this peak seems to be characteristic for individual DE
candidates; see Foidl & Rindler-Daller (2024).

7. Results for the owCDM Extension to ΛCDM
In the course of this section, we fit the wCDM model to
the ΛCDM CMB spectrum as well as to the value H0 =
73.04 km/s/Mpc, derived by Riess et al. (2022), giving the
owCDM model. In CLASS, we can readily incorporate the equations for wCDM, not only in the background module, but also in
the perturbation module, in order to calculate perturbation spectra. Except for ΩΛ , wCDM uses the same cosmological parameters as concordance ΛCDM (see Table 1). Also, it is based upon
the standard CDM framework, concerning its matter content and
the cosmic web (and void) structure. Therefore, we expect no big
differences in the perturbation spectra between wCDM and concordance ΛCDM. In fact, the output by CLASS confirms this
expectation, see Fig. 7, where we show the power spectrum of
the CMB temperature anisotropies of the wCDM and the ΛCDM
model.

80
72
64
56
48
40
32
24
16
8
0
0.0
0.1
100

CDM
wCDM

T [ K]

In addition, we find that our S 8 = 0.784 almost exactly
matches the value of the DES-Y3 measurements for which
S8 =
P
0.782 ± 0.019, by assuming a constant neutrino mass Mν . The
final data release by the Planck mission in Tristram et al. (2024)
also compares their result to this value. The result is in agreement with the findings by Rebouças et al. (2024), who found
that a time-dependent w(z) at late times, can resolve Hubble tension and σ8 -tension. Indeed, this is the case in our extension
wCDM, because the evolution of w(z) in our model is constant
in the early Universe, but in the late stages, it becomes a timedependent function.

model, instead. In each case, there is no conflict between the age
of these model universes and those early galaxies14 .

rel. T

modifications to EDE are purely empirically motivated, whereas
our wCDM model is based upon a consistent set of physical processes involved in the evolution of the Universe.

101

l

102

103

Fig. 7. The CMB temperature power spectrum in ΛCDM (blue) and
in our wCDM model (magenta). The relative differences are shown at
the bottom of the panel, and amount to ∼ 15 %.

Although we see no significant differences in the structure of
the peaks in the CMB temperature power spectrum, the deviations are at a ≲ 15% level. The structure of the peaks is almost
14
Or, rephrased, all these cosmological models face a potential challenge in explaining the early formation of these galaxies.

Horst Foidl and Tanja Rindler-Daller: A ΛCDM Extension Explaining the Hubble Tension and the Spatial Curvature

In Sec. 3.1, we argue that the free-falling, comoving FLRW
observer resides in a local inertial system, where SR applies and
therefore perceives flat space. In the concept of the FLRW metric, the FLRW observer moves with freely streaming particles,
which represent the galaxies in the Universe. The observations of
the CMB in space missions have determined, along with the flatness of space, the temperature fluctuations in the CMB with an
accuracy of the order of 10−5 K around the average background
temperature of roughly 2.7 K. The expansion of the temperature
power spectrum into spherical harmonics to display these measurements results do not include the first multipole moment, the
dipole, for practical purposes. The dipole moment is induced by
our peculiar motion against the CMB, and it is subtracted from
the CMB raw data, because its amplitude of the order of 10−3 K
would strongly dominate the other signal of interest. However,
the fact that this dipole moment is still small, compared to the
mean, just confirms that we – as observers here – fulfill the criterion of being comoving FLRW observers, not strictly (Peacock
(1999)), but to a very high degree (a well-known fact, but see
also e.g., von Hausegger (2024)). Indeed, this observational finding of a small dipole actually confirms that we comove with the
expansion to a high degree. So, the metric we perceive is very
close to the flat Minkowski metric.
The dipole, which corresponds to our peculiar motion against
the CMB, however, offsets us from the perfectly comoving
FLRW observer, who observes a perfectly flat space. Consequently, we now expand the scope and take into account our
peculiar motion relative to the CMB, caused by our “local” cosmological environment (see e.g., Tully et al. (2014)), considering the spatial curvature Ωk (since Ωk = 0 only applies to the
perfectly comoving FLRW observer). As is customary, we call
the resulting model owCDM model15 . The results are depicted in
Fig. 8. Now, the deviation from the ΛCDM spectrum amounts
to a ≲ 0.01% level (disregarding the higher deviations at small l,
15
This acronym is customarily used for extensions to ΛCDM, when
w(z) is different from −1 and additionally a spatial curvature is applied;
see, for example, Particle Data Group Review Chapter 28 Dark Energy
Particle Data Group et al. (2022).

where the error bars in the actual CMB measurements are larger
anyway).

80
72
64
56
48
40
32
24
16
8
0.0000

CDM
owCDM

T [ K]
rel. T

identical, but the peaks are slightly shifted to the left, which can
be explained as follows. The amplitudes of the peaks in the spectrum are determined by the density parameters Ωγ,0 for radiation, and Ωb,0 and ΩCDM,0 for the matter components. The relative height of the peaks is determined by the ratio of Ωb,0 and
ΩCDM,0 . Hence, it is obvious that the structure of the peaks is
in agreement with ΛCDM, as we used the concordance values
for these density parameters. However, the parameterization of
DE impacts the expansion rate, as exemplified in Sec. 6.2. Since
there is no interaction between DE and the other cosmic components, the replacement of DE for Λ does not impact the structure of the peaks. Keeping in mind that the multipole moments,
shown on the x-axis, are in Fourier space, however, explains the
shift of the spectrum to the left-hand side. More precisely, it is
not a shift, but rather a stretching (compressing) of the spectrum
from the right-hand side to the left-hand side, with increasing
(decreasing) expansion rate. Thus, the slightly higher value of
H0 of wCDM (see Fig. 6), compared to ΛCDM explains the minor shift to the left, while providing a solution to the Hubble
tension. Remember that the cosmological parameter Ωk,0 for the
spatial curvature has an analogous impact onto the spectrum. The
degeneracy in the effect onto the spectrum between a change of
spatial curvature and dark energy are well known, see e.g. Hu &
Dodelson (2002).

0.025
100

101

l

102

103

Fig. 8. The CMB temperature power spectrum in ΛCDM (blue) and
in our owCDM model (magenta). The relative differences are shown
at the bottom of the panel, and amount to ∼ 0.01%.

We find a spatial curvature of Ωk,0 = −0.0197 that describes
a local effect, induced by our “local” attractive cosmic environment, decoupling us from perfect Hubble flow (see Tully
et al. (2014)). This value is compatible with the final PR4 of
the Planck mission (Tristram et al. (2024)) with Ωk,0 = −0.012 ±
0.010.
In addition, we find for the owCDM model S 8 = 0.798, which
is within 1σ with DES-Y3’s result of S 8 = 0.782 ± 0.019. Upon
our fitting, we can improve our equation (30) which describes
the evolution of wde , according to



a ≤ i1/6
wde,early when
h
wde (a) = 

wde,early + (1/a−1)−5
(wde,early + 0.91)
(31)
5
when a > 1/6.
To reiterate, we stress that the evolution of wde with cosmic time
and the spatial curvature Ωk,0 = −0.0197 are both effects of the
nonlinear structure formation. The time-dependence of wde is a
global effect by the voids dominating the volume of the Universe, whereas Ωk,0 = −0.0197 is a local effect by our local attractive cosmic environment, decoupling us from perfect Hubble
flow.

8. Summary
We proposed two extensions to ΛCDM, wCDM and owCDM,
which include the following novelties, on which we comment in
the course of this section: a) We take the equivalence principle
and the concept of the comoving FLRW observer at face value
and find that the geometry of the Universe as given by the FLRW
metric and the curvature of space are two individual quantities,
where we identify the geometry with the DE component of our
proposed extensions to ΛCDM. b) In the FLRW formalism, the
density parameters of subcritical and supercritical universes are
also normalized to critical density by considering the suitable
amount of spatial curvature. In contrast to this, we consider the
consequence of the equivalence principle that irrespective of the
geometry (open, closed or flat) of a universe, observers in the
Article number, page 15 of 18

A&A proofs: manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv

reference frame of the comoving FLRW observer, always perceive flat space. Thus, comoving (i.e., free-falling) observers in
subcritical, supercritical or universes at critical density likewise
perceive spatial flatness. c) The FLRW formalism and therefore
also ΛCDM consider the energy densities in the early Universe
as the initial conditions determining the expansion history of the
Universe. In contrast, we consider these initial energy densities
in relation to the post big bang expansion rate as the initial conditions. The relation between these two quantities determines the
geometry of the Universe as described by the curvature of the
FLRW metric. d) Customarily, the averaging problem only considers the density of (linear and non-linear) perturbations and
finds that there is no significant backreaction onto the evolution
of the background universe. We additionally consider the volume of perturbations and find a mild backreaction, caused by
voids dominating the volume of the Universe, providing a possible solution to the Hubble tension problem. e) In owCDM we
include the effect of the CMB dipole, which is otherwise not included in the calculations of FLRW models. This provides an
explanation for the curvature of space measured by PR4 of the
Planck mission (Tristram et al. (2024)) as the mere effect of our
peculiar motion against the CMB, which “decouples” us from
the Hubble flow.
We argued in Sec. 3.1 that the observation of flat space does
not necessarily imply that we live in a universe with global flat
space, expressed by zero curvature in the Einstein equations. In
fact, an observation of flat space, as perceived by the comoving
FLRW observer in the local inertial system, on the grounds of
the equivalence principle, should apply likewise to flat, open and
closed geometries of the FLRW metric. In Sec. 3.2, we exemplified that the initial conditions in the early Universe are given by
the initial energy densities and the initial expansion rate obtained
from the big bang.
In order to account for arbitrary expansion rates obtained from
the big bang, not just the fine-tuned case of ΛCDM, in Sec. 4 we
incorporate the initial expansion rate into the ΛCDM formalism.
We identify the geometry of the Universe induced by the FLRW
metric and the curvature term in the Friedmann equation (5), respectively, with ρde and express the perceived spatial flatness by
ρk = 0. We associated an EoS with ρde , which depends on the
amount of the energy content in the Universe (different from
the operationally defined usual quantities ρde and ρk ). Thus, ρde
(along with wde ) describes the dynamics of the expansion of the
background universe, as determined by the ICs of the Universe,
and is not a “physical substance,” in contrast to the assumption
of the cosmological constant Λ. Nevertheless, we use the fluid
formalism to include its impact into the energy momentum tensor T µν , just in the same way it is done in ΛCDM. The wCDM
model explains the phenomenology of a late-time accelerated
expansion as a kinematic effect, induced by the primeval expansion rate Hini in relation to the initial density, originating from
the big bang. By choosing the same present-day matter content
of Ωm,0 ≃ 0.3 as in ΛCDM, we find wde ≃ −0.8, very close to
−1 of a cosmological constant. To reiterate, the Universe is, according to the wCDM model, described as subcritical Universe.
This is different to ΛCDM, where the cosmological constant Λ
is thought of as a kind of “physical substance” just like matter or
radiation, as part of the energy-momentum tensor, which renders
the Universe to be at critical density.
In the subsequent Sec. 5, we reconsidered the impact of the
nonlinear structure formation in the late epochs of the Universe,
especially in the form of its cosmic web, once voids domiArticle number, page 16 of 18

nate the Universe in volume and (under-)density. We incorporated the impact of backreaction from cosmic voids onto the
expansion history by way of its effect onto the EoS parameter
wde . As a result, the initially constant wde morphs into a timedependent function. We derived this function, using void models informed by cosmological ΛCDM simulations of the previous literature. This is justified, since we adopt the same standard CDM paradigm in our ΛCDM extensions (wCDM and
owCDM). In Sec. 6, we compared the results from computations
of ΛCDM and wCDM. The initially constant EoS parameter,
wde ≃ −0.8, evolves to a more negative value of wde ≃ −0.9
at the present time, once the impact by voids has become significant. While this impact by voids onto the expansion history
affects an overall change of only about 8% in the expansion rate
of the late Universe, it is enough in order for our wCDM model
to explain the Hubble tension problem, which refers to the offset between measurements of the Hubble constant H0 , using the
CMB versus standard candles in the “local” Universe. We implemented wCDM into our amended version of the open-source
Boltzmann code CLASS, in order to calculate the expansion history and the linear power spectra of this model. We compared
our results with concordance ΛCDM, as well as with observations, and found that wCDM agrees well with current data, such
as the Dark Energy Survey.
Owing to the different evolution of ρde in our ΛCDM extension versus Λ in ΛCDM, there is a difference in the age of the
models, namely 13.04 Gyr versus 13.8 Gyr, respectively. We
checked to see that the younger age of wCDM is not in conflict
with age estimates of the oldest known stars. It is also not in conflict with the very early galaxies found by the James Webb Space
Telescope, since the redshift determinations of these galaxies
require a cosmological model to convert redshift into age. In
a wCDM universe, these galaxies would be correspondingly
younger than in a ΛCDM universe.
Furthermore, there are indications from observations that the
evolution of the expansion rate H at low redshift is in conflict
with the assumption of a cosmological constant, and dynamical models of DE with a time-dependent EoS parameter may be
preferred; see for example Dainotti et al. (2022b, 2021, 2022a);
Bargiacchi et al. (2023b,a); Ó Colgáin et al. (2021) and Krishnan et al. (2021). These results may indicate that the origin of
the Hubble tension is likely to be in cosmology and not in local measurement issues, which we discuss in detail in Foidl &
Rindler-Daller (2024). Also, in that paper we find that the Hubble tension problem can be explained phenomenologically in a
very natural way by a DE component with a decreasing EoS parameter w(z). Our ΛCDM extension described in this paper fulfills this property.
In the asymptotic future, the EoS parameter wde converges
to the one of a cosmological constant with a value of −1 (see
Fig. 4). In fact, the future point in time where the effective EoS
parameter (including all cosmic components) is very close to this
value of −1 is not much different between wCDM and concordance ΛCDM.
In the final step, we compared the CMB temperature spectra
of wCDM and ΛCDM. We find that wCDM’s spectrum is shifted
slightly to the left-hand side, while the amplitudes and structure
of the peaks match perfectly. We explain this shift as the effect
due to the increase of the expansion rate in our model, compared to ΛCDM. Subsequently, we fitted wCDM to ΛCDM’s
CMB temperature spectrum, as well as to the locally measured

Horst Foidl and Tanja Rindler-Daller: A ΛCDM Extension Explaining the Hubble Tension and the Spatial Curvature

value of H0 = 73.04 by Riess et al. (2022), while we additionally considered spatial curvature. The resulting owCDM model
reproduces ΛCDM’s CMB spectrum at a 0.01% level, where the
model parameters additionally include Ωk,0 = −0.0197, which
is very well compatible with the final PR4 of the Planck mission (Tristram et al. (2024)). We explain the spatial curvature as
an effect of our “local” attractive cosmological environment (see
e.g. Tully et al. (2014)), which offsets us from the position of
a perfectly comoving FLRW observer, described by Ωk,0 = 0,
thus decoupling us from the Hubble flow, seen as a dipole in the
CMB measurements. This dipole does not enter the computations in ΛCDM, though. In addition to providing a solution to
the Hubble tension, we find that both, wCDM and owCDM, also
mitigate the σ8 tension.
In conclusion, we like to note that we presented two extensions to ΛCDM, which are based on a time-dependent evolution
of the EoS parameter w(z) of the “DE component”. In contrast to
other parameterisations, like the empirically defined CPL parameterisation, we conceived our DE model based on well-accepted
concepts and theories, already applied in ΛCDM. Furthermore,
our extensions wCDM and owCDM can be tested, using ongoing
and future observational campaigns, within their current scope.
Only minor adaptation to the process of data analysis is required
to implement our extensions into these campaigns, as we also exemplify in Foidl & Rindler-Daller (2024), and where we present
a list of observational programs of interest. By determining the
EoS of DE, these programs will be able to rule out our extensions
or confirm them by providing an even more accurate update of
our function of wde (z), i.e. a more observationally informed EoS,
compared to our approximations, based on the Millennium simulation, in this paper.
Acknowledgements. The authors are grateful to Glenn van de Ven, Paul Shapiro,
Dragan Huterer, Oliver Hahn and Bodo Ziegler for helpful and valuable discussions, concerning an earlier version of this manuscript. T.R.-D. acknowledges the
support by the Austrian Science Fund FWF through the FWF Single-Investigator
Grant (FWF-Einzelprojekt) No. P36331-N, and the support by the Wolfgang
Pauli Institute in hosting this grant.

References
Abbott, T. M. C., Aguena, M., Alarcon, A., et al. 2022, Phys. Rev. D, 105,
023520
Abbott, T. M. C., Aguena, M., Alarcon, A., et al. 2023, Phys. Rev. D, 107,
083504
Amendola, L. & Tsujikawa, S. 2010, Dark Energy (Cambridge University Press)
Barausse, E., Matarrese, S., & Riotto, A. 2005, Phys. Rev. D, 71, 063537
Bargiacchi, G., Dainotti, M. G., & Capozziello, S. 2023a, MNRAS, 525, 3104
Bargiacchi, G., Dainotti, M. G., Nagataki, S., & Capozziello, S. 2023b, MNRAS,
521, 3909
Birkhoff, G. D. & Langer, R. E. 1923, Relativity and modern physics (Harvard
University Press)
Bondi, H. 1947, MNRAS, 107, 410
Buchert, T. 2000, General Relativity and Gravitation, 32, 105
Buchert, T. 2001, General Relativity and Gravitation, 33, 1381
Buchert, T. 2011, Classical and Quantum Gravity, 28, 164007
Buchert, T., Carfora, M., Ellis, G. F. R., et al. 2015, Classical and Quantum
Gravity, 32, 215021
Buchert, T. & Ehlers, J. 1997, A&A, 320, 1
Calzetta, E. A., Hu, B. L., & Mazzitelli, F. D. 2001, Phys. Rep., 352, 459
Camarena, D. & Marra, V. 2020, Physical Review Research, 2, 013028
Carloni, S., Leach, J. A., Capozziello, S., & Dunsby, P. K. S. 2008, Classical and
Quantum Gravity, 25, 035008
Cautun, M., van de Weygaert, R., Jones, B. J. T., & Frenk, C. S. 2014, MNRAS,
441, 2923
Chevallier, M. & Polarski, D. 2001, International Journal of Modern Physics D,
10, 213
Cimatti, A. & Moresco, M. 2023, ApJ, 953, 149

Colberg, J. M., Sheth, R. K., Diaferio, A., Gao, L., & Yoshida, N. 2005, MNRAS,
360, 216
Coles, P. & Lucchin, F. 2002, Cosmology: The Origin and Evolution of Cosmic
Structure, Second Edition (Wiley-VCH, July)
Correnti, M., Gennaro, M., Kalirai, J. S., Cohen, R. E., & Brown, T. M. 2018,
ApJ, 864, 147
Curtis-Lake, E., Carniani, S., Cameron, A., et al. 2023, Nature Astronomy, 7,
622
Dainotti, M. G., Bargiacchi, G., Bogdan, M., Capozziello, S., & Nagataki, S.
2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2303.06974
Dainotti, M. G., De Simone, B., Schiavone, T., et al. 2021, ApJ, 912, 150
Dainotti, M. G., De Simone, B. D., Schiavone, T., et al. 2022a, Galaxies, 10, 24
Dainotti, M. G., Nielson, V., Sarracino, G., et al. 2022b, MNRAS, 514, 1828
de Bernardis, P., Ade, P. A. R., Bock, J. J., et al. 2000, Nature, 404, 955
de Sitter, W. 1917, Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen Proceedings Series B Physical Sciences, 19, 1217
Di Valentino, E., Mena, O., Pan, S., et al. 2021, Classical and Quantum Gravity,
38, 153001
Dodelson, S. 2003, Modern cosmology (Academic Press)
Ellis, G. F. R. 1983, in General Relativity and Gravitation, Volume 1, ed.
B. Bertotti, F. de Felice, & A. Pascolini, Vol. 1, 668
Finkelstein, S. L., Bagley, M. B., Ferguson, H. C., et al. 2023, ApJ, 946, L13
Flanagan, É. É. 2005, Phys. Rev. D, 71, 103521
Fließbach, T. 2016, Allgemeine Relativitätstheorie
Foidl, H. & Rindler-Daller, T. 2024, A&A, 686, A210
Friedmann, A. 1922, Zeitschrift fur Physik, 10, 377
Friedmann, A. 1924, Zeitschrift fur Physik, 21, 326
Gasperini, M., Marozzi, G., & Veneziano, G. 2009, J. Cosmology Astropart.
Phys., 2009, 011
Geshnizjani, G., Chung, D. J., & Afshordi, N. 2005, Phys. Rev. D, 72, 023517
Grebel, E. K. 2012, in American Institute of Physics Conference Series, Vol.
1480, First Stars IV - from Hayashi to the Future -, ed. M. Umemura &
K. Omukai, 172–183
Grebel, E. K. 2016, in Star Clusters and Black Holes in Galaxies across Cosmic
Time, ed. Y. Meiron, S. Li, F. K. Liu, & R. Spurzem, Vol. 312, 157–170
Gruzinov, A., Kleban, M., Porrati, M., & Redi, M. 2006, J. Cosmology Astropart.
Phys., 2006, 001
Guth, A. H. 1981, Phys. Rev. D, 23, 347
Harrison, E. R. 2000, Cosmology. The science of the universe. (Cambridge University Press)
Hinshaw, G., Larson, D., Komatsu, E., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208, 19
Hirata, C. M. & Seljak, U. 2005, Phys. Rev. D, 72, 083501
Hogg, D. W., Eisenstein, D. J., Blanton, M. R., et al. 2005, ApJ, 624, 54
Hu, W. & Dodelson, S. 2002, ARA&A, 40, 171
Icke, V. 1984, MNRAS, 206, 1P
Icke, V. 2001, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 252,
Historical Development of Modern Cosmology, ed. V. J. Martínez, V. Trimble, & M. J. Pons-Bordería, 337
Icke, V. & van de Weygaert, R. 1987, A&A, 184, 16
Icke, V. & van de Weygaert, R. 1991, QJRAS, 32, 85
Jebsen, J. T. 1921, Arkiv for Matematik, Astronomi och Fysik, 15, 18
Jebsen, J. T. 2005, General Relativity and Gravitation, 37, 2253
Kamionkowski, M. & Riess, A. G. 2023, Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle
Science, 73, 153
Khalife, A. R., Zanjani, M. B., Galli, S., et al. 2024, J. Cosmology Astropart.
Phys., 2024, 059
Kolb, E. W., Matarrese, S., Notari, A., & Riotto, A. 2005, Phys. Rev. D, 71,
023524
Kolb, E. W. & Turner, M. S. 1990, The early universe, Vol. 69 (CRC Press)
Krishnan, C., Ó Colgáin, E., Sheikh-Jabbari, M. M., & Yang, T. 2021,
Phys. Rev. D, 103, 103509
Kumar, N. & Flanagan, É. É. 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 78, 063537
Kwan, J., Francis, M. J., & Lewis, G. F. 2009, MNRAS, 399, L6
Lemaître, G. 1927, Annales de la Société Scientifique de Bruxelles, 47, 49
Lemaître, G. 1933, Annales de la Société Scientifique de Bruxelles, 53, 51
Lemaître, G. A. & MacCallum, M. A. H. 1997, General Relativity and Gravitation, 29, 641
Lesgourgues, J. 2011, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1104.2932
Li, N. & Schwarz, D. J. 2007, Phys. Rev. D, 76, 083011
Linder, E. V. 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett., 90, 091301
Ma, C.-P. & Bertschinger, E. 1995, ApJ, 455, 7
Maciel, A., Le Delliou, M., & Mimoso, J. P. 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98, 024016
MacTavish, C. J., Ade, P. A. R., Bock, J. J., et al. 2006, ApJ, 647, 799
Martineau, P. & Brandenberger, R. 2005, arXiv e-prints, astro
Milne, E. A. 1933, ZAp, 6, 1
Mukhanov, V. 2005, Physical Foundations of Cosmology (Cambridge University
Press)
Notari, A. 2006, Modern Physics Letters A, 21, 2997
Ó Colgáin, E., Sheikh-Jabbari, M. M., & Yin, L. 2021, Phys. Rev. D, 104, 023510

Article number, page 17 of 18

A&A proofs: manuscript no. PhD-Paper3-arXiv
Okabe, A., Boots, B., & Sugihara, K. 2000, Spatial tessellations. Concepts and
Applications of Voronoi diagrams (John Wiley)
Paranjape, A. 2009, PhD thesis, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India
Parry, M. 2006, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2006, 016
Particle Data Group, P. D. G., Workman, R. L., Burkert, V. D., et al. 2022,
Progress of Theoretical and Experimental Physics, 2022, 083C01
Peacock, J. A. 1999, Cosmological Physics (Cambridge University Press)
Peebles, P. J. E. 1993, Principles of Physical Cosmology (Princeton University
Press)
Perlmutter, S. 2003, Physics Today, 56, 53
Perlmutter, S., Aldering, G., Goldhaber, G., et al. 1999, ApJ, 517, 565
Planck-Collaboration. 2020, A&A, 641, A1
Poulin, V., Smith, T. L., & Karwal, T. 2023, Physics of the Dark Universe, 42,
101348
Rácz, G., Dobos, L., Beck, R., Szapudi, I., & Csabai, I. 2017, MNRAS, 469, L1
Räsänen, S. 2006a, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2006, 003
Räsänen, S. 2006b, Classical and Quantum Gravity, 23, 1823
Rebouças, J., Gordon, J., de Souza, D. H. F., et al. 2024, J. Cosmology Astropart.
Phys., 2024, 042
Ricciardelli, E., Quilis, V., & Planelles, S. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 1192
Riess, A. G., Filippenko, A. V., Challis, P., et al. 1998, AJ, 116, 1009
Riess, A. G., Yuan, W., Macri, L. M., et al. 2022, ApJ, 934, L7
Robertson, B. E., Tacchella, S., Johnson, B. D., et al. 2023, Nature Astronomy,
7, 611
Robertson, H. P. 1935, ApJ, 82, 284
Robertson, H. P. 1936a, ApJ, 83, 187
Robertson, H. P. 1936b, ApJ, 83, 257
Schmidt, B. P., Suntzeff, N. B., Phillips, M. M., et al. 1998, ApJ, 507, 46
Scrimgeour, M. I., Davis, T., Blake, C., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 425, 116
Shandarin, S., Feldman, H. A., Heitmann, K., & Habib, S. 2006, MNRAS, 367,
1629
Siegel, E. R. & Fry, J. N. 2005, ApJ, 628, L1
Smoot, G. F., Bennett, C. L., Kogut, A., et al. 1992, ApJ, 396, L1
Springel, V., White, S. D. M., Jenkins, A., et al. 2005, Nature, 435, 629
Steigman, G. 2007, Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science, 57, 463
Stoeger, W. R., Helmi, A., & Torres, D. F. 2007, International Journal of Modern
Physics D, 16, 1001
Tolman, R. C. 1934, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 20, 169
Tristram, M., Banday, A. J., Douspis, M., et al. 2024, A&A, 682, A37
Tully, R. B., Courtois, H., Hoffman, Y., & Pomarède, D. 2014, Nature, 513, 71
Van Acoleyen, K. 2008, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 2008, 028
van de Weygaert, R. 1994, A&A, 283, 361
van de Weygaert, R. & Icke, V. 1989, A&A, 213, 1
von Hausegger, S. 2024, MNRAS, 535, L49
Voronoi, G. 1908, Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 134, 198
Walker, A. G. 1937, Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 42, 90
Weinberg, S. 1972, Gravitation and Cosmology: Principles and Applications of
the General Theory of Relativity
Weinberg, S. 2008, Cosmology (Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK)
Wetterich, C. 2003, Phys. Rev. D, 67, 043513
Wiltshire, D. L. 2007, New Journal of Physics, 9, 377
Wiltshire, D. L. 2011, Classical and Quantum Gravity, 28, 164006

Article number, page 18 of 18

